“What’s the most bizarre thing that you’ve ever eaten?”
“What makes you laugh?”
“Tell me the thing that made you laugh most this week.”
“What was the funniest movie that you’ve ever seen?”
“What is the worst advice that you’ve ever taken?”
“What is the strangest question you’ve been asked in a job interview?”
“What’s the worst date that you’ve ever had?”
“What’s the worst pick-up line you’ve ever been told?”
“What is the magical power that you wish you had?”
“Know any funny conversation starters?”
“Did you ever have an imaginary friend?”
"If you could trade lives with one person, who would it be?"
"How would you spend your winnings if you won the lottery?"
"What's a funny thing you believed when you were younger?"
"Who would play you in a movie?"
"What book would you bring to a deserted island?"
"Do you have any tattoos? What are they?"
"What's your spirit animal?"
"Is there a pot of gold at the end of the rainbow?"
"Who's the best villain?"
"Who's the best hero?"
"What's one thing you would tell yourself 10 years ago?"
"What happens after death?"
"If a genie gave you three wishes, what would you wish for?"
"What's one power you wish you had?"
"What bothers you?"
"Does anything good happen after midnight?"
"What's the best season?"
"Do aliens exist?"
"What's your favorite word?"
"What's your favorite number?"
"What about our society would surprise a time traveler from the future?"
"What's your guilty pleasure?"
"Which fictional character would you want to be?"
"Which fictional character would you date?"
"What's a secret talent you have?"
"What's a funny prank you've played on someone?"
"What's one embarrassing memory you have?"
"If you could, would you live on another planet?"
"What's a silly nickname you have or have had?"
"What's a nickname you wish you had?"
"If you could have dinner with one person, dead or alive, who would it be?"
"Would you ever read someone else's texts?"
"Where would you most like to be stranded?"
"Would you prefer a grand, public proposal or a private one?"
"What did you last Google?"
"What food do you avoid at all costs?"
"What's a lie you've told to get out of work?"
"How would you commit the perfect crime?"
"What's a funny excuse you've given to leave a party early?"
"How would you ensure that a video goes viral?"
"Have you ever picked your nose in public?"
"Have you ever peed in a swimming pool?"
"Would you rather have the power of invisibility or flight?"
"Would you rather lose social media or television?"
"Chocolate or vanilla?"
"Organization or chaos?"
"Dogs or cats?"
"Snakes or rats?'
"Immortality or the ability to read other people's minds?"
"Would you rather live forever or be happy until you die?"
"Would you rather be too hot or too cold?"
"Books or movies?"
"Stinky cheese—yes or no?"
"Physical books or ebooks?
"Books or movies?"
"Can you follow instructions?"
"What's your least favorite app?"
"Would you rather have room for growth or be perfect as is?"
"Would you rather live on Antarctica or Mars, assuming both could accommodate life?"
"If you had one day left to live, how would you spend it?"
"If you could change one thing about yourself, what would it be?"
"If you had to have an extra body part, what would it be?"
"Did you ever do something bad and no one found out?"
"If you were to trade bodies with someone of another gender for a day, what's the first thing you would do?"
"Does fate exist?"
"What's the meaning of life?"
"Where do dreams come from?"
"Where do thoughts come from?"
"If a tree falls and no one hears it, does it make a sound?"
"What should your gravestone read?"
"Is there life after love?"
"What would you do in the prisoner's dilemma?"
Would you rather have the ability to see 10 minutes into the future or 150 years into the future?
Would you rather find true love today or win the lottery next year?
Would you rather be in jail for five years or be in a coma for a decade?
Would you rather lose your sight or your memories?
Would you rather have universal respect or unlimited power?
Would you rather be 11 feet tall or nine inches tall?
Would you rather be royalty 1,000 years ago or an average person today?
Would you rather always be 10 minutes late or always be 20 minutes early?
Would you rather get a paper cut every time you turn a page or bite your tongue every time you eat?
Would you rather lose all of your friends but keep your best friend or lose your best friend but keep the rest of your buds?
Would you rather have a photographic memory or an IQ of 200?
Would you rather find your soulmate or your calling?
Would you rather have a third ear or a third eye?
Would you rather be asked the same question over and over again or never be spoken to ever again?
Would you rather be reincarnated as a fly or just stop existing when you die?
Would you rather lose all of your teeth or all of your hair?
