Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/17/opinion/new-york-city-ballet-decline-fall.html


Title: The Decline and Fall of New York City Ballet

Subtitle: Once among the city's greatest cultural institutions, George Balanchine’s creation lost its way under his successor, Peter Martins.


George Balanchine and Lincoln Kirstein spent their lifetime creating what was possibly the most beautiful, fragile and deeply historied arts institution in American history — New York City Ballet. Their achievement is all the more miraculous for its having ever existed at all. Mr. Kirstein often said he was amazed each night as the curtain rose, so tenuous was the whole enterprise.

Mr. Balanchine’s stage is now filled with rot. Scandal and abuse allegations have hit the ranks: On Saturday the company fired two of its lead male dancers for inappropriately sharing sexually explicit photographs of dancers. But they are only the latest casualties in the company’s long fall from glory. The cathedral has crumbled.

I danced with City Ballet for 10 years, under Mr. Balanchine’s direction. I learned that discipline is not negotiable, grace is a consequence of humility, devotion to something greater than oneself is salvation and impossible beauty exists. 

The company has now formally hit its nadir after 35 years under the direction of Peter Martins, who succeeded Mr. Balanchine. As a lead dancer for Mr. Balanchine, Mr. Martins embodied a singular purity that made him one of the great male dancers of the 20th century. 

But the company, under his guidance, is now proffering vulgarity, narcissism and amorality. Mr. Martins “retired” in January under well-documented allegations of sexual, physical and verbal abuse.

Mr. Balanchine, for all his genius, had his human frailties, and over the years he was criticized for liking his dancers very tall and very slim (“You can see more,” he explained), for marrying five times, and for requiring that we subjugate our comfort to his demands. He ran a benign dictatorship and “fairness” held little sway in his casting choices.

Yet in the Balanchine era the company was, for audience and dancers alike, about elegance and honor. And occasionally transcendence. The ironies are sobering: When Mr. Kirstein was asked what ballet was about, he explained: “Ballet is about how to behave.”

Now the very worst imaginable behavior takes center stage. In a recent lawsuit, one dancer, Alexandra Waterbury, accused her ex-boyfriend, Chase Finlay, until recently one of the company’s principal dancers, of trading sexually explicit photos and videos he took of her without her consent with other “male dancers, employees, donors and even a pimp.”

The lawsuit adds that Mr. Finlay shared the images with a company benefactor, who wrote of wanting to “get like half a kilo” of cocaine and abuse female dancers “like farm animals” — to which Mr. Finlay allegedly responded, “or like the sluts they are.” Notably, the lawsuit also sues City Ballet itself, a first in 70 years, for fostering a “fraternity-like atmosphere.” (Mr. Finlay resigned last month.)

This descent into moral vacuity has been in the works for decades. One might mark its shocking onset as when Mr. Martins was arrested on charges of beating his new wife, the ballerina Darci Kistler, in 1992. Given that Ms. Kistler was the last ballerina appointed by Mr. Balanchine — who said women “are not equal to men, they are better” — this violence had a particularly pointed symbolism.

Ms. Kistler did not press charges. Mr. Martins was picked up for driving drunk a few days later in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., in the company of a board member. (He also was convicted in early August of drunken driving in a three-car crash after several such arrests.) 

Despite this, the board kept Mr. Martins in his job for over 25 more years as the head of both the company and the School of American Ballet, both multimillion-dollar institutions filled with young girls and women.

Mr. Martins, for the most part, refused to bring any of Mr. Balanchine’s lead dancers, his former peers, to teach at the company. Given that ballet is passed on physically, body to body, this amounted to a robbery from Mr. Martins’s own dancers of the very tradition they inherited, hastening the erosion of Mr. Balanchine’s legacy.

Unsurprisingly, social media has played its predictably insidious role at New York City Ballet. The sacred fourth wall, between audience and artist, was a necessity to our work, to making the magic. Now ballerinas tweet from the wings about their injuries and vegan muffins, amassing vast Twitter and Instagram followers, with endless selfies and self-promotion.

The company’s recent ad campaigns showing bare midriffs and legs, windblown hair, and suggestive poses by slim young dancers — have used sex as a marketing tool, lowering the lure to the prurient. In that context, the Finlay scandal is no surprise. The current lawsuit with its allegations of appalling misogynistic behavior is on a continuum.

A doting ballet mother once asked Mr. Balanchine: “Will my daughter be a great dancer?” He replied in his characteristically sly manner: “La danse, Madame, c’est une question morale.” She wanted to hear about fame. He knew it was about character.

But he also knew that it wouldn’t last. He liked to joke, “Après moi, le board!” Curiously, he refused to publicly name Mr. Martins as his successor and, astonishingly, he did not leave the rights to a single one of his 445 works to the company he founded.

Mr. Balanchine called his dancers “angelic messengers.” Those of us who remain and remember are weeping.

Toni Bentley, a former dancer with New York City Ballet, is the author of five books, including “Winter Season, A Dancer’s Journal.”

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) and join the Facebook political discussion group, Voting While Female.

