Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/20/opinion/columnists/brett-kavanaugh-christine-blasey-ford-hearing.html

Title: A Fork in the Road for the Kavanaugh Nomination
Subtitle: Also: A simple financial-aid calculator grows larger. You should try it out.
By David Leonhardt

This article is part of the Opinion Today newsletter. You can sign up here to receive the newsletter each weekday.

First, Brett Kavanaugh: Senate Republicans are clearly operating in bad faith, as a Times editorial explains. They show little sign of wanting to get at the truth of what did or didn’t happen between Kavanaugh and Christine Blasey Ford. The Republicans are not calling for the F.B.I. to investigate and are not willing to call other relevant witnesses. 

But something else has become clear, as well. The only way the country will get any closer to the truth is if Blasey decides that she is willing to testify even under the Republicans’ conditions — which is, of course, her call — and that Senate Democrats also accept those conditions. 

“It’s growing increasingly clear that if Christine Blasey Ford doesn't testify, Kavanaugh is going to be confirmed with Republicans falling in line — barring any new developments over the next week,” as CNN’s Manu Raju put it. 

“We’ll find out in the next couple of days whether all of these objections from Democrats and Ford’s lawyers have just been negotiating tactics and she will testify on Monday after all,” Slate’s Jim Newell writes. Otherwise, Republican leaders will be thrilled, because they “didn’t want Ford to testify in a public hearing in the first place, and they still don’t.” 

“Democrats will be in a much better position to demand more investigation and more delay after Ford testifies than if she refuses to testify,” writes Josh Barro, newly of New York magazine.

Vox’s Tara Golshan and Li Zhou have a good primer with more details. 

How much college really costs. Regular readers know how valuable I find this easy financial-aid calculator for selective colleges. It shows that these colleges are much less expensive for middle-class and poor students than many of them — or their parents — imagine, thanks to financial aid. 

At many top private colleges, lower-income students — from a family earning $50,000 or less, for example — face an annual bill of $6,000. Students can often cover that cost through part-time work and a small annual loan, without their parents having to pay more. It’s true that affluent and upper-middle-class students face much larger bills, but their parents tend to have incomes in the six figures and substantial savings. Paying for college isn’t fun for them, but it doesn’t require them to make major changes to their lifestyle — or require their children to take on enormous debt. 

Today, the calculator — known as MyinTuition — is expanding to include 15 new colleges, bringing the total number to 46. The new participants include Caltech, Emory, Harvard, Illinois Wesleyan, Penn, Vanderbilt, Washington University in St. Louis and the universities of Chicago, Denver and Richmond. 

If you have five minutes, give the calculator a try. You don’t need to enter your actual information, if you don’t want. You can do it for a hypothetical family. Here is my more detailed explanation of what the calculator shows and why it matters. 

The larger point is that the real crisis with college costs isn’t on the fancy campuses with the highest list prices. It’s at colleges where the dropout rates are shockingly high, sometimes above 50 percent, and students still leave with meaningful amounts of debt.

So why do you hear so many more complaints about the supposedly unjust cost of the elite private colleges? Because that’s where many journalists, think-tank experts and politicians send their own children.

You can join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook. I am also writing a daily email newsletter and invite you to subscribe.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).

