Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/23/opinion/north-south-korea-nuclear-weapons.html

Title: South Korea’s Leader Opens a Door to the North
Subtitle: Moon Jae-in’s visit to Pyongyang was a promising step. But the North Korean nuclear threat remains.
By The Editorial Board

After months of stalemate, diplomatic efforts to resolve the North Korean nuclear crisis are quickening, thanks largely to the South Korean president, Moon Jae-in.

His three-day visit to Pyongyang last week included his third summit meeting with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un and set the stage for talks on Monday with President Trump at the United Nations General Assembly in New York.

On Thursday, Mr. Moon made clear what he would like to come out of the meeting with Mr. Trump — a commitment by the United States to declare an end to the Korean War as an incentive for North Korea to abandon its nuclear weapons.

Ending the formal state of war 65 years after the fighting ceased should not be that difficult, even if the ultimate goal — ridding the world of the threat from North Korea’s nuclear arsenal — remains elusive.

But the Trump administration still seems confused about its strategy, caught between a president who, eager for a deal, said that the Moon-Kim summit had made “tremendous progress,” and hard-line advisers who doubt any deal with the North is possible.

Mr. Moon, who won the presidency last year on a promise to pursue peace with the North, has been determined to try. Rather than playing a back-seat role to America and the North, he has worked to nudge Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim toward engagement.

Mr. Moon’s dreams of reconciling the rival Koreas, split since the Korean War ended in a 1953 armistice, are deeply personal.

He was born in a refugee camp to parents who fled the North during the war. A human rights lawyer in the years of South Korea’s military dictatorship, he was chief of staff to President Roh Moo-hyun during the last round of Korean summitry in 2007. 

Mr. Moon and Mr. Kim appear committed to seeing how far they can go toward reconciling their two countries. One sign was Mr. Moon’s address — the first ever in Pyongyang by a South Korean leader — promising a new era of peace and a “future of common prosperity” to a stadium filled with 150,000 cheering North Koreans. Another was Mr. Kim’s pledge to make a reciprocal visit to Seoul.

Some American experts fear ties between the two Koreas are deepening too rapidly and will undermine the alliance between South Korea and the United States, which has 28,000 troops in the country.

The decline in tensions on the peninsula is already making it harder for Mr. Trump to maintain the sanctions he says are crucial to forcing North Korea to abandon its nuclear capability.

An end-of-war declaration is not the same as a peace treaty, which would presumably go into effect only after North Korea denuclearizes. 

Without Mr. Moon’s peacemaking skills, Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim might still be threatening war against each other, as they did last year. But that’s no reason for complacency. North Korea retains an estimated 20 to 60 nuclear weapons and the facilities to produce more.

In his discussions with Mr. Moon, Mr. Kim did move the ball forward by agreeing on concrete steps that would help fulfill his denuclearization pledge. They include permanently dismantling his country’s main nuclear site at Yongbyon and allowing international inspections.

None of those steps come close to meeting the administration’s demands, now apparently modified, that North Korea surrender all its nuclear capability and then negotiate. But they do provide a promising basis for a new round of talks.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).

