Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/19/style/new-stores-nyc-shopping.html

Title: 4 New Stores to Shop in New York - The New York Times

By Hayley Phelan

Who says retail is dying? Someone tell that to the four companies behind exciting new shops in New York. These openings, including a big and airy space in SoHo and a perfectly curated niche on the Lower East Side, prove that brick-and-mortar may be changing but it’s far from dead.

Address 112 Mercer Street, 646-476-4188; kotn.com

Who’s Behind It Mackenzie Yeates, Rami Helali and Benjamin Sehl, from Toronto

Go for the … High-quality, yet affordable, cotton basics. Kotn works with Egyptian cotton farmers to keep costs low while helping to revive a struggling agriculture business. The results are supersoft styles in just-right cuts. Think: a nostalgic 1990s-ish sweatshirt, cropped culotte sweatpants, the perfect boxy tee that won’t induce a landslide of guilt.

Stay for the … Zen-like atmosphere. The airy space looks like the kind of living room Gwyneth Paltrow might kick back in, complete with plenty of comfortable seating options.

Address 85 Mercer Street, 646-692-6000; sunspel.com/us

Where It Comes From Britain

Go for the … Time-tested knitwear staples cut from superfine fabrics. The label has been perfecting classically chic basics since it was founded in 1860, and its expertly made lamb’s wool crew necks, boat-neck cotton tops and plain cotton briefs are a testament to that longtime experience. In other words, if you’re looking for anything trendy, look elsewhere.

Stay for the … History. Consider Sunspel an original fashion disrupters. Thomas Hill founded the company in 1860 with the idea of creating simple, everyday clothing from his innovative fabric: a lightweight, very fine cotton. The company was one of the first to produce T-shirts, forever changing the underwear business as we know it.

Address 1 Rivington Street, 212-473-6908; us.13bonaparte.com

Who’s Behind It David Sarfati, from Paris

Go for the … Chance to be a cooler-than-thou Parisian tomboy — or at least to dress like one. Begun as a men’s wear brand in 2012, the label quickly built a cult following with women for its simple, architecturally inspired styles. Naturally an expansion into women’s wear proper was soon to follow. Highlights include its Le Denim collection, which features asymmetric chambray shirts and jeans with zip embellishments.

Stay for the ... Minimalist décor and thoughtfully curated flowers. Each week the store displays an exotic floral selection of rare tropical blooms.

Address: 57 Greene Street (until Oct. 4)

Who’s Behind It The designer and global citizen Peter Dundas

Go for the ... Unapologetically glamorous bohemian frocks and peasant blouses. Mr. Dundas made a name for himself turning out darkly sexy 1970s-inflected fare at Emilio Pucci and Roberto Cavalli, the kind of stuff you’d expect to see on Anita Pallenberg in her heyday. These are clothes made to be danced in.

Stay for the ... Probability that you’ll run into a model. The store’s opening was attended by Natasha Poly, Shanina Shaik and Jessica Hart. Luckily the sleek design offers plenty of reflective surfaces to help you scope them out.

