Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/nyregion/chris-collins-congress-ad-nate-mcmurray-korea.html

Title: An Attack Ad From an Indicted Congressman Is Panned as ‘Xenophobic’ - The New York Times

By Tyler Pager

Representative Chris Collins, a New York Republican indicted on insider trading charges, just jumped back into the race for his House seat, but he’s already making waves with a negative ad.

Mr. Collins attacked his Democratic challenger for the Buffalo-area seat, Nate McMurray, in a racially tinged television ad that draws on a video that Mr. McMurray released ahead of a June summit between the United States and North Korea.

The ad features Mr. McMurray, whose wife is a naturalized citizen from South Korea, speaking in Korean, with captions provided by the Collins campaign. As Mr. McMurray speaks, the ad suggests that Mr. McMurray wanted “fewer jobs for us … more jobs for China and Korea.”

At another point, the ad asserts that Mr. McMurray “helped American companies hire foreign workers,” as a picture of Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader, hovers in the background.

“You can take Nate McMurray at his word,” it concludes.

But Mr. McMurray does not discuss jobs in the video, which he said he recorded earlier in the campaign to highlight his language skills and to express optimism about the possibility of peace between North Korea and South Korea. The full video has since been taken down, but a translation by The New York Times confirmed that the snippet aired in the political ad does not mention jobs.

On Monday, Mr. McMurray called the television ad “xenophobic,” mentioning that he had watched it with his son, who is half Korean.

“It was hurtful,” Mr. McMurray said in an interview. “They’ve used everything in their power to make it look like the very fact of speaking Korean or Chinese is un-American or wrong.”

Mr. McMurray, the town supervisor of Grand Island, N.Y., won a Fulbright scholarship in 2003 to study at the Constitutional Court of Korea in South Korea. He went on to teach United States law at the Judicial Research and Training Institute in Seoul, and he represented American businesses in Asia.

The Collins campaign has defended the ad.

[Mr. Collins had suspended his campaign after being indicted, but he resumed his re-election effort last week.]

“This is a real video of Nate McMurray that he removed from social media because he didn’t want to defend his efforts to promote a Korean-U.S. Free Trade Agreement that shipped nearly 100,000 U.S. jobs overseas,” Natalie Baldassarre, a spokeswoman for Mr. Collins’s campaign, said in a statement. “Nate McMurray needs a new video to explain why he opposes President Trump’s policies that are protecting American jobs and American workers. Hopefully, he’ll leave that video up.”

Mr. McMurray said the video was taken down after the summit because he was disappointed with Mr. Trump’s celebratory reception of Mr. Kim. Though he supported Mr. Trump’s overtures to Mr. Kim, Mr. McMurray said he was disappointed in the execution of the summit.

“It was a slap in the face to freedom,” he said.

The United States–Korea Free Trade Agreement passed Congress in 2011 with bipartisan support, but Mr. Trump has rallied against it. In his speech at the Republican National Convention, he called the agreement a “job-killing trade deal.”

Mr. McMurray said the video made no mention of the trade agreement, and his only involvement with the trade deal related to his work as a business consultant. Part of his job was to explain the impact of the agreement for businesses operating in Asia.

Had the Collins campaign “really cared” about the trade agreement, Mr. McMurray said, “they would have talked about it” in the ad.

“They didn’t,” he said. “This is a complete pivot because they’re embarrassed about what their real intention was.”

Thomas Pinansky, the senior foreign partner at the Seoul law firm, Barun Law, who helped hire Mr. McMurray and oversaw his employment, said the advertisement does not reflect the candidate’s work.

“It’s insane,” said Mr. Pinansky, who said he identifies as an independent voter. “It’s ridiculous. Of course, he’d have no authority to send jobs anywhere. He was just trying to make a very highly regulated market more liberalized and open for U.S. businesses.”

In August, Mr. Collins suspended his bid for a fourth term in the House after federal prosecutors indicted him on insider trading charges. Prosecutors said Mr. Collins told his son and others that a drug company they had invested in, Innate Immunotherapeutics, had failed a critical drug trial. Mr. Collins, who sat on Innate’s board, has maintained his innocence, vowing to fight the charges.

Democrats had hoped Mr. Collins’s legal troubles would help them flip a Republican seat in one of the state’s most conservative districts. But last week Mr. Collins said his lawyers recommended he stay in the race, pointing to New York’s complex election laws, which make it difficult to remove a candidate from the ballot. They feared the removal process would buoy Mr. McMurray’s campaign.

