Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/22/nyregion/josh-gottheimer-swastika-graffiti.html

Title: Campaign Sign for New Jersey Congressman Vandalized With Swastikas and Racist Graffiti - The New York Times

By Nick Corasaniti

A campaign sign for Representative Josh Gottheimer and the home of one of his supporters were defaced with swastikas, profanity and racial epithets in Hampton Township, N.J., early Saturday morning.

The sign, a large banner, was defaced with anti-Semitic and racist remarks written in black spray paint. “Vote MAGA, Libs suck. Go to CALI Dems,” was scrawled across the other side of the sign, which supported the re-election of Mr. Gottheimer, a Democrat.

The home was also vandalized with a large swastika painted on the garage door. Bright yellow Weichert real estate broker signs on an adjacent property were also vandalized with swastikas and male genitalia, as was a nearby road sign.

“We were first alerted by a text from our neighbor,” said Adam Stolarsky, 48, who lives in the house with his girlfriend, Colleen Murch.

He said they first put up the campaign sign on Sunday, only to have it knocked down two days later. He also said that there were hand prints all over the garage.

Sgt. Jeff Flynn, a public information officer for the New Jersey State Police, confirmed that troopers were investigating.

Mr. Gottheimer, who is Jewish, has faced anti-Semitism in campaigns before. During his 2016 campaign, a flier circulated depicting him with devil’s horns and a goatee, surrounded by gothic lettering. Both Republican and Democratic campaigns decried it as anti-Semitic.

In 2017, he wrote an op-ed in The Record of North Jersey with Senator Cory Booker, titled “Anti-Semitism has no home in New Jersey,” after the destruction of a Jewish symbol called the eruv in multiple towns in the state and anti-Semitic graffiti was found on the Airport Diner in Wantage.

“There’s no place for white supremacists or anti-Semitism in our broader community, and this vile hate-motivated crime certainly does not reflect the values of the people of Sussex County,” Mr. Gottheimer, who is running for his second term against John McCann, a Republican, said in a statement on Saturday. He said he was grateful for the swift response from the State Police.

In a statement, Mr. McCann said that “the anti-Semitic actions in Sussex County are abhorrent,” and that “there is no room for racism in our politics, in our state or in our country.”

The racist graffiti comes just days after the state was roiled by a recording of the sheriff of the state’s most populous county making racist remarks about black people and Sikhs.

Hampton Township, a small town in the northwestern part of Sussex County, is about 95 percent white, according to census figures.

Mr. Stolarsky said he had already put up a new sign.

“If we didn’t put it back up quickly then the idiots win,” he said.

