Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/arts/music/carrie-underwood-cry-pretty-billboard.html

Title: Carrie Underwood Scores a No. 1 Album, and the Best Sales of the Year for a Woman - The New York Times

By Joe Coscarelli

Carrie Underwood is No. 1 on the Billboard album chart, having earned the best sales week of the year by a woman.

“Cry Pretty,” Ms. Underwood’s sixth LP, debuts with a total of 266,000 album equivalent units, including 251,000 in traditional sales (combining physical and digital copies) and 14 million streams, according to Nielsen Music. Overall, those numbers bested Cardi B’s “Invasion of Privacy,” from April, the previous high-water mark for a female artist in 2018.

Using a now-standard tactic to boost first-week sales, Ms. Underwood relied in part on a bundle that paired her new album with tickets to her upcoming tour; the album must be redeemed by the customer to count as a sale. “Cry Pretty” also performed well at big box stores like Target and Walmart, Billboard said.

[Never miss a pop music story: Sign up for our weekly newsletter, Louder.]

The album is Ms. Underwood’s fourth Billboard No. 1 on the chart, a record for a woman in country. (Garth Brooks has nine country albums that have hit No. 1; Taylor Swift has three, plus two pop albums.) The first-week total for “Cry Pretty” was also the biggest debut week for a country album since Luke Bryan’s “Kill the Lights” in the summer of 2015.

At No. 2 this week, Eminem relied much more on digital streams, as is common in hip-hop: Songs from “Kamikaze,” the rapper’s surprise album from late August, were played 71 million times in the last chart period, and added another 44,000 in sales, for a total of 103,000 units. “East Atlanta Love Letter” by the R&B singer 6lack came in at No. 3 in its debut, with 77,000 units, including 73 million streams.

Drake’s “Scorpion,” in its 12th week on the chart, is No. 4, collecting another 86 million streams, while Travis Scott’s “Astroworld,” another digital juggernaut, jumps back to No. 5 from No. 7 last week with 81 million streams of its own.

