Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/23/sports/football/eagles-colts-luck-wentz.html

Title: Carson Wentz Edges Andrew Luck as Two Comebacks Cross Paths in Philadelphia - The New York Times

By Ben Shpigel

PHILADELPHIA — The only option left for the Indianapolis Colts on Sunday afternoon — trailing Philadelphia by four points, ball at their own 46, just five seconds remaining in the game — was to heave the ball downfield. Which is why Jacoby Brissett, who had not taken a snap all day, ran onto the field.

“It took me a second to figure out what was going on,” said Andrew Luck, who had thrown the Colts’ other 40 passes in the game. Once Luck did figure it out what was going on, he accepted it, and he watched, like everyone else at a soggy Lincoln Financial Field, as Brissett launched the ball about 65 yards toward the back of the end zone, where it bounced off some hands before falling to the ground.

Game over, with the Colts losing, 20-16, as Carson Wentz, playing his first game at quarterback for the Eagles in nine and a half months, outlasted Luck, the quarterback playing his third game in 20 months. It was, for both quarterbacks and their teams, a slog of a game, much of it contested in a pelting rain, and Luck’s absence at the end of it was at once conspicuous and altogether reasonable.

Luck missed all of last season recovering from a severe shoulder injury sustained more than a year earlier, a fiasco bungled by all parties that left him feeling drained and isolated. His former teammate Matt Hasselbeck, who played with Luck for three seasons in Indianapolis, used to tell Luck how, if he ever went on to miss a long stretch, that it would be the most miserable experience of his life. The two spoke over the phone last week, and Luck told Hasselbeck how prescient he was.

“It’s a physical struggle,” said Hasselbeck, now an analyst for ESPN, in a telephone interview. “It’s probably even more of a mental struggle. And you don’t feel part of the team.”

Luck has returned this season healthy and strong and in what Hasselbeck called a better frame of mind, unencumbered by the doubt and frustration that had consumed him, and more comfortable with who he is, as a person and as a football player. Before his shoulder injury, Luck might have been able to throw that ball where it needed to go. Then again, maybe he couldn’t.

“I’ll be honest, I don’t know,” Luck said after Sunday’s loss. “In that situation, I don’t know if I could have. I’ll be honest, I haven’t run around and scrambled and stuck a foot in the ground and tried to chuck it x amount of yards.”

When quarterbacks return from injury, the mind remembers what it wants to remember. The natural inclination is to assume that their convalescence represented nothing more than ellipses, a tantalizing recess between touchdowns, and that they will resume evading defenders and flinging impossible throws. More than any other quarterback, Wentz resembles Luck, big and strong and mobile, an improvisational maestro capable of extending plays within their structure.

In his return from torn knee ligaments, Wentz completed 25 of 37 passes for 255 yards, absorbing five sacks while at times still demonstrating real elusiveness. In the second quarter, after Wentz dived for the first-down marker, Coach Doug Pederson did not flinch. “Pretty standard,” Wentz said.

On third-and-9 from the Indianapolis 36, on the 11-minute-plus fourth-quarter drive by the Eagles that was capped by Wendell Smallwood’s 4-yard touchdown run, Wentz spun away from two Colts defenders in the pocket and whipped a pass to Nelson Agholor for the first down.

“That’s the guy I expected,” said Eagles tight end Zach Ertz, who caught five passes for 73 yards. “I didn’t expect him to come out here and freaking just go through the motions.”

The Luck who emerged from his three-year injury ordeal has recalibrated his playing style, spending, on average, less time in the pocket than ever — a snappy 2.33 seconds, according to Pro Football Focus, across the first two games this season. He is completing more passes, a sharp 68.5 percent, but gaining the fewest yards per attempt of his career, a measly 5.3. And through three quarters on Sunday, Luck had thrown 26 passes, completing 15, for just 80 yards.

“There were times that we called some stuff down the field,” Indianapolis Coach Frank Reich said. “But when we do it, it’s kind of a touchdown-checkdown mentality: Think deep, and if it’s not there, then check it down.”

Watching Luck from afar, Bruce Arians, who coached him as a rookie, said last week that Luck impressed him in those first two games this season: a loss against Cincinnati, when a fumble spoiled a late drive, and a victory at Washington. Arians got an NFL Game Pass subscription specifically to review his former pupil’s game film.

“He’s got the velocity,” said Arians, now an analyst for CBS, in a telephone interview. “He’s got the accuracy.”

Assessing his performance on Sunday, Luck bemoaned how the Colts scored just one touchdown in five red-zone appearances; how they turned two Wentz turnovers deep in Philadelphia territory into mere field goals; and how on the Colts’ penultimate drive, when, with two plays from the Eagles’ 4 and a touchdown needed to win the game, he failed to connect with T. Y. Hilton on a fade and then was sacked from behind by Derek Barnett. Dejected after being tackled, Luck pounded the ground with his fists.

As he spoke afterward, Hilton wore a T-shirt with a sketch of Luck and a quote attributed to Thomas Jefferson that read, “I’m a Great Believer in Luck.”

As with the Eagles when it comes to Wentz, the Colts’ stance has not changed. They believe in him, and Luck believes in himself.

“I’ll keep working on getting my arm to where it maybe can hit an 80-yard throw,” Luck said.

