Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/11/magazine/new-sentences-from-chelsea-hodsons-tonight-im-someone-else.html

Title: New Sentences: From Chelsea Hodson’s ‘Tonight I’m Someone Else’ - The New York Times

By Sam Anderson

— From “Tonight I’m Someone Else” (Holt Paperbacks, 2018, Page 181), a collection of essays by Chelsea Hodson.

There is no greater joy than being almost done. Not beginning, not slogging through the middle, and certainly not finishing. Compared with these other stages, the concept “almost done” is huge. It holds inside it so many states of being: relief, promise, risk, achievement. “I’m almost done,” I often tell myself as soon as I begin something — and in that moment, I truly believe it. “Almost” is a huge seeping mist of a word; it can fill a hairline crack or an entire continent, whatever you might need.

Besides, to begin anything is, in a way, to be almost done with it. “In my beginning is my end,” T.S. Eliot wrote in the second of his “Four Quartets” — at the end of which he added, “In my end is my beginning.” When we start a painting, an essay or a love affair, we place ourselves on a continuum on which that thing is also, ultimately, finished. To enter that continuum is, therefore, to do most of the work. The rest is only details. To write a first sentence is, more or less, to write the last. I struggle all the time to make my editors understand this simple truth.

When you actually finish something, you fall off the far edge of the continuum, and your experience of it ceases, and you have to go find yourself a new one. Much better to be perpetually not quite there, holding the whole continuum in your hands. Every phase is still there with you: the richness of the doing, the fantasy of finality, the promise of achievement.

To be done is always, on some level, a horror. As the essayist Chelsea Hodson puts it: “I’ve always equated completion with death, and now I become attached to ongoing problems as if they might carry me somewhere.” Even ongoing dysfunction is, crucially, ongoing. The end is only the end.

