Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/world/europe/pope-francis-latvia.html

Title: Pope Francis Honors Latvia’s Past While Looking to Its Future - The New York Times

By Elisabetta Povoledo

ROME — In a daylong visit to Latvia on Monday, Pope Francis recalled the past suffering of Latvians, who preserved their faith during decades of Nazi and Soviet occupation, even as he cautioned against the return of isolationist sentiments that are re-emerging throughout Europe.

“Sometimes we see a return to ways of thinking that would have us be suspicious of others, or would show us with statistics that we would be better off, more prosperous and more secure just by ourselves,” the pope said during a Mass at the Basilica of the Assumption in the southeastern city of Aglona.

In those moments, the pope said, the Virgin Mary invites “us to ‘receive’ our brothers and sisters, to care for them, in a spirit of universal fraternity.”

Thousands of faithful attended the rain-drenched Mass at Latvia’s most important Catholic shrine, a highly anticipated event in a four-day trip to the Baltics. The basilica’s venerated icon of the Mother of God was moved outdoors for the event, which was held in a square created when Pope John Paul II visited Aglona in 1993, when Latvia was a fledgling republic.

Mary “stands near those who suffer,” the pope said in his homily, “including those who have been put on trial, condemned by all, deported” — those, he said, who are on the fringes of society.

The pope arrived in Latvia on Monday morning after two days in Lithuania. He visits Estonia on Tuesday.

The trip has momentarily derailed attention from a host of new accusations in the clerical abuse scandal that has plagued the Roman Catholic Church for two decades — even as Francis hopes to address concerns via a worldwide meeting of bishops next year — and what is arguably his biggest diplomatic coup: a provisional deal reached with China over the ordination of bishops.

Earlier on Monday, Francis placed flowers at the monument to Latvian independence in Riga, and then prayed alongside members of various Christian faiths — Lutheran, Russian Orthodox, Baptist, Methodist, Episcopalian — at a prayer session in the Lutheran cathedral.

There, the pope praised what he called one of Latvia’s special traits: a “lived ecumenism” that allowed the country’s various Christian churches to successfully create “unity while keeping the richness and singularity of each.”

As he had in Lithuania, the pope recalled the tribulations of the region’s recent history, roiled by decades of Nazi and Soviet occupation, which Latvia has managed to overcome.

Latvia “has known difficult social, political, economic and spiritual struggles, the fruit of past divisions and conflicts, yet today has become one of the principal cultural, political and shipping centers of the region,” the pope told civic and state officials Monday morning.

The nation, he added, “has sought to become a place of dialogue and encounter, of a coexistence that is peaceful and looks to the future.”

The pope’s visit coincides with the centenary of three Baltic countries’ independence.

“You know all too well the price of that freedom, which you have had to win over and over again,” the pope said in his address to Latvian officials on Monday. The country’s spiritual roots have “sustained you and in turn has given you the creativity needed to generate new social processes,” he said, “despite the currents of reductionism and exclusion that always threaten the fabric of society.”

Meeting with older adults in St. James’s Cathedral in Riga, the capital, later in the morning, the pope acknowledged that some had experienced “the horror of war, then political repression, persecution and exile.”

“Neither the Nazi regime nor the Soviet regime could extinguish the faith in your hearts,” he said. “You fought the good fight. You ran the race. You kept the faith.”

