Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/20/well/live/raising-awareness-of-brca-mutations.html

Title: Raising Awareness of BRCA Mutations - The New York Times

By Susan Gubar

You don’t have to be Jewish to inherit one of the BRCA gene mutations. But these mutations, which increase the risk of adult-onset breast, ovarian, prostate and other cancers, disproportionately injure Jewish people. One in 400 people in the general population carry a BRCA mutation; one in 40 in the Jewish (mostly Ashkenazi) population. Some of those affected are working to encourage more genetic testing to help prevent these cancers.

I landed in the office of a genetic counselor after a 2008 diagnosis of late-stage ovarian cancer. Would I fill in the disease history in my ancestry? Since many relatives died in the Holocaust or self-destructed afterward, I could offer only scant information. My “positive” test result seemed grotesquely negative to me. What might I have bequeathed to my two biological daughters? Parental guilt — irrational but implacable — hit hard. Children of people with a mutation have a 50 percent chance of inheriting BRCA and therefore a greatly elevated risk of a cancer diagnosis. 

I steadied myself with the realization that my two stepdaughters — neither Jewish — had dealt with a BRCA mutation proactively and were thriving.

Then I began following advocacy groups on the internet. FORCE (Facing Our Risk of Cancer Empowered) seeks to improve the lives of all people confronting hereditary breast, ovarian and related cancers. Sharsheret (Hebrew for chain) specializes in helping young women and families with Jewish backgrounds. Both established an impressive record of information sharing before Angelina Jolie publicized the issue.

That these platforms and Ms. Jolie have not solved the problem of raising consciousness about BRCA, however, is apparent from the recent history of Lauren Corduck, whose trajectory proves the need for the work she has undertaken.

In December, 2016, a friend convinced Ms. Corduck to see a genetic counselor because of her Ashkenazi parentage. A few weeks later she happened to have an M.R.I. to determine the cause of back pain. She quickly learned that she had a risky mutation and Stage 4 ovarian cancer, prompting rigorous treatment, terror and anger.

Despite her ethnic background, as well as incidents of breast cancer on her father’s side of the family, none of Ms. Corduck’s physicians had mentioned her high risk. If they had, she could have learned of the mutation earlier. There is no reliable detection tool for ovarian cancer, so she would have opted for the surgical removal of her ovaries and fallopian tubes. Instead, at 46 years old she was tackling metastases as far away from her abdomen as a lymph node near her collarbone.

Channeling her anger into activism, Ms. Corduck established the nonprofit organization Oneinforty. Through its awareness campaign, symposia, medical professional development sessions and the provision of emotional support, Oneinforty informs the public of the relatively high risk for Jews and encourages people with at least one Ashkenazi grandparent to consider genetic counseling and, when appropriate, testing — either through a blood test or a newer saliva home testing kit. 

“Half of the people with a BRCA mutation have no known family history of the BRCA cancers,” Ms. Corduck said. “Physicians who are not offering testing to patients need to be educated and patients should be proactive on their own behalf.”

Ms. Corduck seeks to raise awareness of the vulnerability of Jewish men as well as women. Fathers like her own often carry one of the BRCA mutations that 50 percent of their male and female offspring will inherit. Men with a mutation may suffer from breast, prostate or pancreatic cancers, or melanoma triggered by it. I suspect that my genetic mutation also came from my paternal lineage.

“Your BRCA tumors are stupid,” my treasured first oncologist told me, much to my hilarity. “There’s a drug in the pipeline, but it may not be ready in time.” That sobered me up.

After my third recurrence, miraculously, there was a breakthrough in the previously dormant field of ovarian cancer. In 2012, my doctor managed to place me in a clinical trial with one of the new PARP inhibitors — three others have since been approved by the Food and Drug Administration — that now extend the lives of women with ovarian disease. A number of these drugs are being tested on women with BRCA-related metastatic breast cancer, and one has been approved by the F.D.A. 

Ms. Corduck, with faith in research and “zero parental guilt,” feels “relieved” that she and her husband can provide the emotional support that their 10-year-old daughter will need when she confronts her risk as a young adult instead of landing in an oncologist’s office. Whether we count ourselves one in 40 or one in 400, we are less alone because of Ms. Corduck’s intrepid outreach. She proves that this terrible disease paradoxically generates astonishing valor from even the most endangered patient-activists.

She is following the example of the X-ray crystallographer Rosalind Franklin, who contributed in the early 1950s to the discovery of the DNA double helix. She continued to produce scientific papers while undergoing treatments for ovarian cancer. (In 1962 James Watson, Francis Crick and Maurice Wilkins shared the Nobel Prize for their work on DNA, but Ms. Franklin did not; she died in 1958 at the age of 37, and the rules of the prize precluded its being given posthumously.)

Without the work on DNA, the detection of the first BRCA mutation would never have happened. It was found by the American researcher Dr. Mary-Claire King, who believes that all women at the age of 30 should be offered a genetic test “as part of routine medical care” to protect themselves from breast and ovarian cancers.

Since I am a beneficiary of BRCA research who has been kept alive for six years by an experimental drug, I feel impelled to say, let us now praise women in science: Long may they continue to advance knowledge and safeguard future lives.

Susan Gubar, who has been dealing with ovarian cancer since 2008, is distinguished emerita professor of English at Indiana University.

