Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/sports/uno-westminster-dog.html

Title: Remembering the One and Only Uno - The New York Times

By Richard Sandomir

Any doubt that a show dog knew he was performing for a big arena crowd was dispelled on Feb. 11, 2008 during the first night of the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show.

It was the night that a national audience was introduced to Uno, a merry 15-inch-tall beagle, born three years earlier in Belleville, Ill. Uno, who died last week at 13, was competing in the hound group against 25 other rivals when he bayed at judge Ralph Lemcke several times. After that first howl (or was it a croon?), it became clear that Uno was engaging in some type of strategic behavior.

One, two, three times, maybe more (in memory it seems to have been a canine soliloquy), Uno sent a wordless message that wowed the well-dressed crowd at Madison Square Garden.

“He’s saying to the judge, ‘Look at me,’ ” his handler, Aaron Wilkerson, said afterward. “So he just plants his feet and bays away.”

When Lemcke named Uno the winner of the hound group, he said, “This is one of the best hounds I’ve ever seen.”

The next night, Uno was one of seven group winners vying for Best in Show, entering the Garden’s green-carpeted floor to a thunderous applause that confirmed his star power. He was now the favorite son in love with the bright lights and the roar of the crowd. Elevating his popularity was that the beagle is a breed familiar to millions.

And after baying his way into the heart of the judge, Dr. J. Donald Jones, Uno won the title, the first ever by a beagle at Westminster.

“He’s the most perfect beagle I’ve ever seen,” Dr. Jones said.

Uno’s victory that night was the start of a 10-year after-show life as Westminster’s most popular winner, a well-traveled reign that included a visit to the White House to visit George W. and Laura Bush and ended last week when he died of cancer on the ranch he shared with his owner, Caroline Dowell, in Austin, Tex.

He was sterile and left no children.

I count myself among those who were captivated by Uno. He was charming, accomplished and playful enough for me to consider writing a book about him. Gay Talese had Frank Sinatra. I had Uno. I followed him around, but the book never came off, probably because Uno’s verbal skills were confined largely to expressive baying. He would sit on command but not for interviews. He did steal my lunch off a desk at Westminster headquarters, a cherished memory.

I met up with him in St. Louis where I saw people do double takes wherever he was taken by his squire, David Frei, then the longtime voice of the Westminster show broadcast and head of the kennel club’s communications.

“Is that Uno?” people kept asking — and if Uno could have given autographs and stood still for selfies, he would have. He was, however, shown a flicker of disrespect when a restaurant ordained that he eat outside with his human posse. They were not Uno fans.

On a visit to Busch Stadium, he was ushered into St. Louis Cardinals manager Tony LaRussa’s office. Uno sniffed around for a while and LaRussa, an animal rescue activist, invited Uno to urinate on his carpeting. Uno declined the offer — he could hold it in, thank you very much — and continued his stadium rounds until he trotted onto the field to fetch the first pitch from Fredbird, the Cardinal’s mascot.

Late in the game, Uno was snoozing in a luxury box, his muzzle on Frei’s right thigh. The crowd rose in a standing ovation as the Cardinals loaded the bases. He awoke with a start and leapt to his feet. He was fully alert now — I do not recall him baying — seemingly ready for his victory lap.

“He thinks the applause is for him,” said Kathy Weichert, one of his breeders, who was part of his pack.

Of course he did. When it was time that day to finally do what LaRussa suggested he do, he left the stadium with Frei holding his leash. A young couple asked Frei if they could take pictures of Uno. Frei said that would be fine, but suggested that they wait until he finished his business. As the couple waited, the husband said that he was trashing pictures of his children on his cellphone to make room for snaps of Uno.

Frei and I shook our heads in amazement.

Several months later, I met Frei and Uno at 77th Street and Central Park West, hours before the start of the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade.

Uno had become, by then, a world famous beagle and was asked to ride the Peanuts float, which was built to look like a giant version of Snoopy’s doghouse. It was a lovely canine moment: a real 28-pound beagle standing in for a beloved comics beagle.

On that crisp morning, Mayor Michael Bloomberg stopped by to greet Uno, who calmly posed for grip-and-grin photos, but he soon hopped onto the float, with Frei in tow, and behaved professionally in the hours it took for the float to complete its full route.

Uno maintained his popularity long after other Westminster champions had been crowned but always returned home to Austin where Dowell, a bunch of rescue beagles and a potbellied pig awaited him.

In 2015, after another beagle, Miss P, won Westminster’s Best in Show, it was a time for celebration: Miss P was Uno’s grandniece, the closest he would get to a victory by a progeny.

I called Dowell late that night. She said that Uno had not watched the show.

But he insisted that the graying Uno was still in good shape, then added, “you can put him in the ring, and he’d win tonight.”

