Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/arts/television/mr-inbetween-review-fx.html

Title: Review: In ‘Mr. Inbetween,’ the Hit Man Feels Your Pain - The New York Times

By Mike Hale

“I wouldn’t say I enjoy hitting people,” Ray Shoesmith says, taking his turn at a support group for men with anger issues. “You know, if I hit somebody, I generally got a pretty good reason.”

In “Mr. Inbetween,” a tidy six-episode series having its premiere Tuesday on FX, the world keeps supplying Ray with reasons: men who block his car in the parking lot, men who don’t pay their debts, arrogant young men who insult Ray in front of his daughter. The last is what gets Ray sent to the group. “Why are you here?” the leader asks. “I bashed a bloke,” Ray replies. It’s what he does.

Commissioned by FX Australia before that network was shuttered and now making its world premiere in the United States, “Mr. Inbetween” is another dark comedy about the divided soul of the 21st century male, caught between rage and cuddly vulnerability — in dramatic terms, between Scorsese and “Everybody Loves Raymond.”

Ray, played by Scott Ryan — who created and wrote the series, based on his own film “The Magician” — is a tough guy for hire who will rough someone up or, if needed, put him away permanently. His situation recalls Bill Hader’s hit-man comedy “Barry” on HBO, but Ray, while sensitive, isn’t particularly interested in redemption, artistic or otherwise.

He just wants to be an ordinary bloke, and Mr. Ryan, working with the director Nash Edgerton (“Gringo”), deftly and dryly exploits the gap between Ray’s violent occupation and his efforts to be a good father, boyfriend, brother, ex-husband and mentor. Ray lives by a code, like all righteously violent men onscreen, but he’ll relax it situationally, such as when his daughter needs to be told that unicorns are real.

Mr. Ryan has had a lot of time to work on this material (the film was originally released in 2005), and the half-hour episodes clip right along, building to a botched kidnapping that unfolds with lackadaisical yet clockwork comic timing. Some of the crime-caper devices — the dead guy who isn’t dead, the accomplice who turns out to be a cop, the repeated chore of body disposal — are predictable. But the balance between dread and deadpan laughs is adroitly maintained, and there’s an appealingly casual, improvisatory vibe.

As Ray, Mr. Ryan employs a wolfish grin that’s an uncomfortable mix of amused and sadistic, and a low-key acting style that’s practically a non-style. His performance works for the character, as you’d expect, but it’s limited — you sense that you’re supposed to feel a poignancy in Ray’s contradictions that doesn’t quite come through.

And while you wouldn’t want the show to tip over into sentimentality or preachiness, its studious avoidance of judgment starts to feel like a cop-out, or perhaps just a lazy choice, by the end of the season. (Also in the fair warning department, Ray’s world is very much a man’s world, and a white man’s world to boot.)

With a total running time that clocks in at under three hours, though, “Mr. Inbetween” can be enjoyed simply for Mr. Ryan’s ability to put together scenes of slowly simmering absurdity, like Ray’s reluctant errand to help a friend whose wife discovers his pornography stash, or a debate about baby names between a kidnapper and his abductee. (“Name one bloke you know called Quinton who’s a blokey bloke.”)

And while the recent surge of distinctive Australian series has taken place on streaming services — Acorn TV (“Jack Irish,” “Mystery Road,” “Sando”), Netflix (“Secret City,” “The Letdown”), Hulu (“Safe Harbour”), Sundance Now (“Dead Lucky”) — “Mr. Inbetween” brings it to your cable grid. No more excuses.

