Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/sports/football/steelers-buccaneers.html

Title: Tampa Bay’s Ryan Fitzpatrick Beats Himself, and Then Nearly Makes a Comeback - The New York Times

By Benjamin Hoffman

Vance McDonald caught the ball on Pittsburgh’s 35-yard line, looked up the field and saw that Chris Conte, a defensive back, was the only thing between him and the end zone. The big tight end reached out, grabbed Conte by the helmet and tossed him to the side before sprinting down the sideline for a 75-yard touchdown.

It was not the go-ahead play, and Monday’s game in Tampa, Fla., was decided more by Ryan Fitzpatrick’s three interceptions than anything the Steelers did on offense, but McDonald’s dispatching of Conte was fairly symbolic of the matchup. The Buccaneers got in the Steelers’ way, and Pittsburgh pushed them aside for a 30-27 victory, its first of the season.

The game marked a return to form for the Steelers, who held on to win after nearly blowing a 20-point halftime lead. And it was a speed bump — but most likely not an ending point — for the Fitzpatrick experience in Tampa.

Fitzpatrick, a journeyman playing for his seventh team in 14 seasons, had come into the game in the midst of a magical roll. Through two weeks he had passed for 819 yards and eight touchdowns, leading the Buccaneers to an unexpected 2-0 record in the first two games of Jameis Winston’s three-game suspension for violating the N.F.L.’s personal conduct policy.

Against Pittsburgh, who had just allowed Patrick Mahomes of the Kansas City Chiefs to pass for 326 yards and six touchdowns in Week 2, there was optimism that Fitzpatrick could make it three consecutive wins. He came close, rallying Tampa Bay to within three points, but ultimately he had dug a hole too deep with three first-half interceptions, one of which was returned for a touchdown. The game showed all there is to the Fitzpatrick experience, with risky plays succeeding and failing with equal amounts of flair.

Even with the turnovers, Fitzpatrick completed 30 of 50 passes for 411 yards and three touchdowns. He is the first quarterback in N.F.L. history to pass for 400 or more yards in three consecutive games.

For the Steelers there is cause for concern on defense, where the secondary was torched for a second consecutive week, but the team will probably focus on the vintage performance by Ben Roethlisberger.

He piled up 353 yards and three touchdowns while being intercepted once. He favored McDonald (four catches for 112 yards) and JuJu Smith-Schuster (nine for 116) to the recently disgruntled Antonio Brown (six for 50). The biggest problem for Pittsburgh, beyond the team’s defense, was inconsistency in the running game, with James Conner, still running in place of the holdout Le’Veon Bell, leading a group that generated just 78 yards on the ground, with nearly all of that coming in the fourth quarter.

The win for the Steelers will quiet the calls for a change at coach — the Steelers have not fired a coach since 1968, so Coach Mike Tomlin’s job was quite likely safe regardless. But the bigger question is whether a valiant comeback attempt after a horrendous start will be enough for Fitzpatrick to hold off Winston now that the team’s preferred starting quarterback is no longer suspended.

