Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/17/t-magazine/london-architects-design-chan-eayrs.html

Title: The Architects Who Live Wherever They Work - The New York Times

By Megan O’Grady

IN OUR INSTA AGE, the life cycle of a design trend has never been shorter: An idea that seemed so fresh one day feels dead the next, gone the way of so many millennial pink sofas and Beni Ourain rugs. How, then, does one create a real home, built to endure the whims of fashion? And how do designers, dependent on cultivating a certain recognizable vernacular for clients, manage to create an identity without becoming their own cliché?

A pair of young British architects may have found the answer. Over the last five years, Zoe Chan Eayrs and Merlin Eayrs have been creating some of the more compellingly decorated private homes in London, answering a creeping urban homogeneity with living spaces that feel as soulful as they do sophisticated: a Huguenot townhouse in Spitalfields reimagined with clean, modern lines and luxe materials like Arabescato marble and limed oak; a spare, skylit contemporary brick home with picture windows inspired by Chinese courtyard houses built on the site of a former auto body shop in Islington. The couple, both in their early 30s, have a wholly unorthodox way of working. They buy properties they love, often moving in and occupying them as they renovate — “scoping it out from the inside,” as Chan Eayrs puts it. They often stay until it is fully furnished — down to the art on the walls, the volume of Walter Benjamin essays on the window seat and the garden shears in the drawer — and then they move on. By collapsing the roles of architect, developer and interior designer, they make spaces with an unparalleled intimacy and a highly refined sense of place. “When we choose a project, it’s not just a project,” says Chan Eayrs. “It’s where we choose to spend two to three years of our life, every day, touching and feeling it, living it.”

THEIR LATEST ENDEAVOR is a 2,850-square-foot loft on Shoreditch High Street, near the British designer J.W. Anderson’s boutique and the East London Soho House outpost. The 19th-century former shoe factory has been transformed into an urban retreat: quiet, light, homey, verdant with plants and the brush-marked glow of a pistachio-green heritage lime plaster that adorns every angle of the space — a haven from the hubbub below and an elegant rebuttal to the Scandinavian-style chill so pervasive in the city’s postindustrial spaces. The Beldi, as they call it — a Moroccan Arabic word that loosely means local or indigenous — plays with point and counterpoint, hard and soft, warm and cool. There are windows on every wall, offering views in all directions. “We immediately imagined living there. When we bought it, we stripped it down to the core and stayed there with just a bed and a bath, in order to really feel the way the light moves around the space, for example,” says Eayrs.

An interplay of textures makes the most of that light, from the blue and green Jochen Holz glassware on the kitchen shelves to the vegetal cast-iron sconce in the hall, and from the veins of the cross-sawn oak wall paneling throughout the flat to the delicate joins of the hand-cut pink tiles, arranged in varying patterns to mark the thresholds of different living spaces in lieu of rugs. The tiles also tell a more personal history: One motif is inspired by the riads of Marrakesh, where the couple married in 2015, another by the courtyard of a house in Suzhou, China, where they recently traveled with their toddler daughter, Max. The tiled steps leading to the flat’s outdoor space, overlooking the treetops and St. Leonard’s Church, were inspired by the set of stairs in the nave of Venice’s Santa Maria dei Miracoli.

A sense of high-level craftsmanship prevails inside, where there are hand-woven green linen shutters in the bedrooms, a collaboration with the neighborhood artist and weaver Christabel Balfour, and the late Christopher Magarshack’s blue handmade ceramics in the kitchen. Several pieces are sourced from the New Craftsmen, a Mayfair store that champions British furniture and décor: The long elm trestle table is by Gareth Neal; a modern riff on the Orkney chair, made of woven willow, is by Neal and the basket maker Annemarie O’Sullivan; the dining chairs and a green-lacquered settle bench in the study area are by the British stylist and designer Sue Skeen in collaboration with the New Craftsmen. “People can’t pin down our aesthetic because there is no formula to the way we work. We simply find objects that we like and that make sense in the space,” says Chan Eayrs. This means carved wood bowls from a shop in Udaipur, India, mixed with yew-wood tables by Reynolds of Ludlow found in an English antiques shop in Stamford and familiar vintage shapes refreshed with unexpected upholstery selections: a puffy Mario Bellini sofa in olive green leather against a pair of Zyklus chairs in creamy Pierre Frey velvet, for example. Such details allow the duo to achieve something that most decorators never do: an inimitable look that only the imperfections of time and the idiosyncrasy of the human touch can produce.

Though the overall effect of their spaces is of a deeper, more thoughtful beauty, living on a construction site wasn’t easy: The pair slept in the space for months without walls, a kitchen or even furniture. “Zoe was pregnant, and we didn’t have blinds. I’m sure we shocked the neighbors,” says Eayrs. Laying out the floor tiles took nearly a year, and the basins in the bathrooms and wet bar were so heavy they required six men to carry them.

THE COUPLE’S METHOD evolved naturally over time, borne of a mutual dissatisfaction with conventions and a desire for greater independence. They met in 2013, near the end of their study at London’s Architectural Association School of Architecture. (Chan Eayrs also has a degree in architecture from the University of Cambridge; Eayrs previously studied interior design at the Inchbald School of Design.) Chan Eayrs, who grew up in London regularly visiting building sites — her father is an architect, her mother a banker — was so eager to stop sketching theoretical projects and build something real that she renovated her own apartment and sold it for a profit while she was still a student.

Eayrs, who was raised on a farm 60 miles north of London, in Cambridgeshire, had initially set out to design large-scale urban social housing only to find himself craving something more hands-on. “I think my father has had quite an influence on me in that I’ve kind of grown up with angle grinders and sparks flying around. And actually, I really enjoy that part of the process,” he says. “For me, a big part of design is feeling the materials and working directly with the craftsmen and builder.” He was renovating private residences with a friend when he met his wife-to-be, and thus began their romance as well as this new, more symbiotic way of working: Carlo Scarpa, the Venetian architect and designer known for his emphasis on materials and handcraft, is one touchstone. Now that they have a child, though, their peripatetic ways are shifting; they’re soon to start renovating a permanent residence for themselves in Hampstead, originally a stable block on an 18th-century estate. Meanwhile, they’ve already begun camping out on the site of their next project: a sustainably built house in the seaside resort town of St. Ives, some 300 miles southwest of London — an investigation into living more in tune with nature.

With each new project, the pair reinvent their aesthetic, freshly inspired by a new neighborhood, a style of architecture or somewhere they’ve recently traveled. And with a non-negligible amount of up-front risk — the client is involved only at the end, when they purchase the home — comes a great deal of reward in the form of total creative freedom. “It’s like a piece of our art that people are buying,” says Chan Eayrs. “Traditionally, if you got your own architect and interior designer, you would base that choice on past work, and the architect is regurgitating something that they’ve already done before. Instead, our clients know there will be nothing else like it.”

