Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/19/t-magazine/ts-design-luxury-issue-no-room-for-compromise.html

Title: T’s Design & Luxury Issue: No Room for Compromise - The New York Times

By Hanya Yanagihara

Early in my first tenure at T, in 2015, I decided I was going to befriend Tom Delavan, the magazine’s design and interiors director, a process that proved to be — surprisingly and a little disappointingly — much easier than I’d anticipated. One day, once we’d reached a certain level of closeness, I showed him, a little shyly and a little proudly, some photographs of my apartment. I said I wanted his opinion; I was really expecting praise.

Tom looked at the photos. His eyes widened, slightly. His mouth opened, but no words emerged. Finally, he made the sound an injured goat makes when it’s in its final, anguished death throes. I was astonished. “Are you not even going to try to pretend to like it?” I asked him. “I’m sorry,” he said. “I just can’t.”

At the time (and now), I was offended, although what did I expect? Tom is not only constitutionally incapable of giving false praise, but he has the best taste in interior design of anyone I know. His home is the antithesis of mine (I told my architect I wanted the apartment to look as if Elsa Schiaparelli had been let loose in a Hong Kong gadget shop): It is gray and white, muted and low-lit, spare and disciplined. Yet it is also deeply intimate and inviting; in place of color there are textures, and though there isn’t much furniture, what is there is ideally proportioned for the ways we want to sit, lie and sprawl in a room we really love. It’s accommodating while also quietly, insistently, undeniably his.

But like most people to whom aesthetics deeply matter, Tom is also catholic in his tastes and able to distinguish a compelling space from a space he’d actually enjoy inhabiting: He likes (as I do) a decaying colonial bungalow stuffed with clutter, but he also likes a Brutalist cement cube in which a single uncomfortable sofa seems to hover, spacecraftlike. This is some of what makes choosing the interiors that go into T such fun — broadly speaking, I’d say I have a higher tolerance for zaniness, and Tom for the undone and unfinished, but despite our personal proclivities, we rarely disagree. We’ve both imagined our lives in all of the houses in this issue, and that fantasy is always what ultimately determines which properties make it into the magazine — the houses we want to feature are the ones in which we’ve already mentally arranged our books and shoes and art. There are many beautiful spaces out there, but we’re always looking for something beyond beauty — that elusive sense of personality, of idiosyncrasy, the sense that its owner is deeply selfish, by which I mean that she is thinking only of whether she will like it, not anyone else. A memorable interior, like any memorable piece of art, isn’t the one that’s likable but the one that evokes a strong reaction: love, of course, but also revulsion. I’ve always thought that the most devastating critique one can give an artwork is a shrug: It’s nice, I guess. But what’s the point of being nice? Anything really worth seeing (or reading, or eating, or watching) is something that at least some people will hate. The houses in this issue aren’t meant to appeal to everyone; they were meant to appeal to their owners, and that is why they appealed to us as well.

This was the philosophy with which I made my own home, to which I have never invited Tom. But maybe now I will. After all, my respect for his opinion aside, no one will ever be able to say that it doesn’t belong to me. Because the only thing second to good taste is an unshakable sense of self-possession.

Read more from T’s Sept. 23 Design & Luxury Issue

