Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/20/style/toronto-film-festival-style.html

Title: What 9 Movie Insiders Wore to the Toronto Film Festival  - The New York Times

By John Ortved

Of the more than 250 films shown at the Toronto International Film Festival this month, few drew as much scrutiny (and criticism) “The Death and Life of John F. Donovan.” Directed by Xavier Dolan, a 29-year-old former child actor, the film tells the story of a television celebrity (played by Kit Harington) and his letters to a young fan. 

On Sept. 10, Mr. Dolan and his cast gathered at the Thompson Toronto hotel before the premiere; the after-party was at the Soho House Toronto. Here’s what they wore.

Occupation: director, writer, actor

Age: 29

What’s your suit?

I’m wearing Vuitton. Head to toe. I’m the ambassador for their brand and have been for three years now.

Why did you go with the small check tonight?

It was fall-ish. I didn’t feel like going for dark blue; certainly not black. It’s a festival that’s glamorous, sure, but it’s a bit lighter and more relaxed than other A-list festivals like Venice or Cannes.

What did you wear as a teenager?

All kinds of ways. I just wanted to fit in. Skater, grunge, layering. It was very confused and very not working.

When did it click?

Very recently. I still tried to be someone I wasn’t until very late.

What’s written on your hand?

“I must not tell lies.” It’s from Harry Potter.

Occupation: actor

Age: 33

Take me through your outfit.

Hugo Boss tuxedo. Hugo Boss shoes. Calvin Klein tie.

Do you often wear three-piece?

To me, three-pieces are just more elegant. I love wearing a vest because it keeps your tie in order. And also you can open your jacket.

Be honest: How often does Paris help you with your clothes?

Every single time I get dressed.

Are you allowed to leave the house without approval?

Yes. I get that freedom. The only thing she gives me a little bit of trouble about is hats. I wear hats all the time.

Like, fedoras?

Baseball caps. I am completely against the fedora fad, if you can call it that. It’s either a beanie or a backward baseball cap.

Occupation: actress

Age: 45

You smell incredible. What are you wearing?

Escentric Molecules. It’s the original one. It’s good, isn’t it? Fresh! People follow me down the street, and I think it’s because I’m an actress but it’s actually because of the scent.

I’m sure that’s it.

I’m telling you! It’s happened.

What are you wearing?

A Oscar de la Renta racing green velvet column gown with a plunging neckline, which I’m not usually a fan of, but I like this one. And it’s got a belt with a lock.

What are you securing?

I’m locking in my right to choose.

Aren’t you worried you’re going to freeze in the theater?

No because I’ve got a little shifty coat.

And what does your tattoo say?

“Mapinza.” It’s Shona, my mom’s first language. The simplest translation is “wanton child.” It’s the kid that you want to shut them up. They’re always curious. I think people are a bit jealous of mapinza. My mother was mapinza and I’m mapinza. 

Occupation: actor

Age: 31

All my questions are going to be about “Game of Thrones.”

I’m used to it.

Is this look black tie, or semiformal?

I always end up going with a bow tie or a black tie, and this is an attempt to do something a little bit different and go without the tie. I honestly never button my shirt up to the top. I quite like it.

The lapel is very peaked, almost dagger-like.

Yeah, I like either a big lapel or a thin lapel, something in between can be a bit boring.

Who did you crush on as a kid?

Strangely enough, Natalie Portman. And she was in the movie.

Did you guys discuss it?

I’ve never met her. I did a whole movie with Natalie Portman, and I didn’t meet her once.

That’s a tragedy.

I know.

Occupation: actress

Age: 37

You dress is slightly flamenco.

It’s Greta Constantine, a Canadian designer.

Your shoes have what look like mounds of grapes, or berries, on them. How are you on heels?

I’m as good as I have to be.

What do you normally wear to the movies?

For my real, regular life, quite honestly I wear stuff I’ve taken from sets. They’ll find me some really comfy jeans, and I’ll just take them. Because I don’t like shopping.

Right now, there’s a wardrobe person reading this and saying: “So that’s what happened.”

Exactly.

Occupation: actress

Age: 31

Can you say your name for the record, please?

It’s Sarah Gadon. I’m 5-foot-3. And I’m here for the role of aspiring leading lady.

How’s that going?

It’s going O.K. Do you know what I’m wearing?

Is it Proenza?

Good guess, but no. It’s Erdem. And Louboutin heels. And Birks diamonds.

The movie involves obsessing over actors at a tender age. Who was your childhood crush?

It was definitely Sarah Michelle Gellar, from “Buffy.”

What did you like about her style?

I liked her hair more than anything. She had full early-2000s highlights. She was always wearing pants, because she was kicking butt.

Occupation: co-chairman of the Creative Artists Agency

Age: 57

What are you wearing tonight?

Tom Ford suit.

You look pretty dressed up. You look like an agent.

Really, an agent. That’s interesting. What kind of agent?

A powerful one. The shirt is Tom Ford, too?

Yes.

Do you always wear Tom Ford when you’re at festivals and functions?

I mostly wear Tom Ford always. As long as Tom Ford has been making clothes, I’ve been wearing them.

And you have this neat bandanna around your neck.

It’s old. My grandfather. From Louisiana.

Where do you think he got it?

No clue. His grandfather.

Occupation: camera assistant

Age: 33

You’re wearing lots of layers. Where is the dress from?

I found it at Local 23. It’s a vintage boutique in Montreal. 

What’s on your feet?

I’m wearing boots I found for $3 from someone selling them on the street.

You bought someone’s shoes?

Well, they were secondhand shoes.

How about the jacket?

Again, a secondhand find. Le Magasin de Chaînon, a secondhand store in Montreal, on Saint Laurent.

What were you thinking when you got dressed?

I don’t wear heels, so these made sense. And black looks good on me. Then add a little bit of unusual color with an eggplant skirt with yellow and orange.

Occupation: national feature film executive, Telefilm Canada

Age: “early 50s”

What are you doing at the festival?

Two movies — the Xavier Dolan and Maxime Giroux films, I financed them.

You’re the money.

I’m the money. It’s true. We have a little team, and we read scripts and we have a third of the budget for the French market.

Tell me about your top. It’s a little bit pajama.

This is Babaton, the high end of Aritzia, a Canadian brand. My pants are Club Monaco. And my shoes are Browns.

What look were you going for?

I wanted to look like a little boy. High heels and stuff when you’re in your early 50s, you think, I’m going to suffer. You want to look young, but you’re not young. And you don’t want to pretend.

