Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/21/dining/what-to-cook-this-weekend.html

Title: What to Cook This Weekend - The New York Times

By Sam Sifton

Good morning. Tomorrow’s the first day of fall. If it’s chilly and stark, which it won’t be, I’d like to make an apple skillet cake with salted caramel frosting, have it for dessert after a dinner of chicken braised in two vinegars, some lentil pilaf. Build a fire out back, sit in the gloaming, letting it warm my knees.

It’ll probably be muggy, though, and neither sunny nor not. So maybe lamb steak with Lebanese spices (above) will be a better option, the meat adorned with yogurt sauce, alongside sautéed chard. Or sautéed sea scallops with brown butter, capers and lemon. That’s a beautiful dish. I could make kale salad with apples and Cheddar and have the children revolt because I always add dried cranberries to it — Saturday night’s all right for fighting.

I’d like to make Morning Glory muffins this weekend, and serve them just as if the family were staying in a bed-and-breakfast somewhere, the muffins on a platter sitting on a doily and the day full of promise and adventure. To wit: If you buy your tickets online and get there early, then dash through the crowds to start your visit at the shark exhibit instead of the huge aquarium up front, the new New York Aquarium is a real weekend delight. (Don’t believe me? Read Michael Kimmelman on the joy of the place’s, er, sharkitecture, in The Times a while back.)

Or maybe you’re bound for some agritainment, the bane of rural byways every fall: corn mazes and u-pick pumpkin patches, mums for miles, apples everywhere. You’ll need some recipes for the fruit.

No? You’ll be sitting home, watching “BoJack Horseman,” thinking about laundry, about what’s going to happen when the L train goes dark? (Hi!) Have a fiery, cumin-bright lamb burger courtesy of the kids at Lucky Peach, listen to some Car Seat Headrest. Later you can go for a bike ride, visit Superiority Burger for some charred broccoli.

That’s how it might go for some in New York City, at any rate. For you, perhaps, pozole is the way to go instead. Or Cincinnati-style chili over spaghetti. It’s important to remember that there are many across the southeastern portion of the United States who will be hurting this weekend, still mucking out from Florence’s wrath. Cook a North Carolina-style fish stew in their honor, perhaps, or if you’re lucky enough, serve some to those who haven’t had a good hot meal all week.

You’ll find thousands more recipes to make this weekend on NYT Cooking. (You can also discover ideas for what to cook on our Facebook and Instagram feeds.) Yes, you will need a subscription to access them. Subscriptions allow us to continue doing this work. They are our oxygen.

And we work hard to make them worthwhile. If something goes wrong while you’re cooking, either with a recipe or with the technology we use to support the recipes, just reach out for help: cookingcare@nytimes.com. We’ll get back to you.

Now, it has nothing to do with fregola or beets, but “Maniac” gets underway on Netflix today — Emma Stone and Jonah Hill in an adaptation of a dark, sci-fi-ish Norwegian comedy series, directed by Cary Fukunaga, who made “True Detective” Season 1. The trailer suggests he’ll bring the weirdness once more.

I think you’ll enjoy Valerie Stivers’s essay, “What David Foster Wallace Ate,” in The Paris Review. I know you’ll like this previously unreleased recording of “Gainesville,” from Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers.

Finally, and staying with the subject of electric guitars, there’s nothing really better than reading Kelefa Sanneh on popular music. His “The Unlikely Endurance of Christian Rock,” in The New Yorker, proves that plain. Have a great weekend. I’ll see you on Sunday.

