Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/arts/television/what-to-watch-this-week.html

Title: What to Watch This Week - The New York Times

By Margaret Lyons

Every Monday, the Times TV critic Margaret Lyons picks the best of what’s ahead before the weekend. Check back each week for more recommendations.

‘The Good Place’When to watch: Thursday at 8 p.m., on NBC.

Easily the best comedy on network TV and one of the best comedies on TV, period, is back for its third season, starting with a two-part episode in which our ridiculous Scooby gang gets another chance at life on earth. I love this show so much that when I realized the episode I was watching was 44 minutes long, not 22, I said, “Yay!” out loud.

This return to their one-time selves allows us to see everyone in his or her lousiest state, with Eleanor (Kristen Bell) rattling off all the worst parts about Arizona, Chidi (William Jackson Harper) incapacitated by indecision, Tahani (Jameela Jamil) dropping celebrities’ names at every opportunity and Jason (Manny Jacinto) believing that “claustrophobic” means “afraid of Santa Claus.”Seasons 1 and 2 of “The Good Place” are available on Netflix; definitely start at the beginning. There’s an elaborate and well-constructed internal mythology that builds on itself.

‘Maniac’When to watch: Now, on Netflix.

I went into “Maniac” worried that it was going to be fundamentally miserable and dedicated to making me miserable, too, the way some contemporary dramas seem convinced that we, in the audience, are their enemy. “Maniac” is more champagne-and-psychedelics than whiskey-and-downers — so its sci-fi dreams and grunged-out New York wind up being fun after all.Emma Stone and Jonah Hill star as people who find themselves in a psychiatric study that sends them on imagined capers to help heal their subconscious minds. Everything is a little weird and off and grimy, but Justin Theroux is there, and Stanley Kubrick’s influences are there, and sometimes people sing and sometimes it’s pretty silly. The show was created by Patrick Somerville, who used to write for “The Leftovers,” and “Maniac” shares that show’s combination of intensity and savvy glibness. Cary Joji Fukunaga, who was recently tapped to direct the next James Bond movie, directed all 10 episodes. (Read the Times review here.)

This is the big week for new and returning shows. Unfortunately, almost all of the fall pilots are crummy. On Monday, the “Magnum P.I.” pilot is a snooze, and “Manifest,” the missing-plane drama, is even worse.

On Tuesday, watching “F.B.I.” and “New Amsterdam” feels like wearing borrowed underwear — technically acceptable in an emergency, but no one would choose to live like this. (Read the Times review here.) And on Wednesday, “Single Parents,” a comedy about single parenting, is more “kids say the darnedest things when those things are scripted” than compelling, and “A Million Little Pieces” is pure mawkishness.

Which brings us to Thursday and to “Murphy Brown.” Weirdly, the show it reminds me of most is “Roseanne” — right down to the “Nasty Woman” shirt and the frustrating predictability of its Trump jokes. This revival picks up significantly when it turns more of its attention to the relationships between its characters, especially in Episodes 2 and 3.

Returning Shows of Interest:

Monday: “Dancing With the Stars,” “The Voice,” “The Big Bang Theory”

Tuesday: “Lethal Weapon,” “This Is Us”

Wednesday: “Survivor,” “Empire,” “The Goldbergs,” “Modern Family”

Thursday: “Grey’s Anatomy,” “Law & Order: SVU,” “Mom,” “How to Get Away With Murder”

