Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/21/books/review/still-life-with-monkey-katharine-weber.html

Title: ‘Still Life With Monkey’: A Mischievous, Gluttonous Primate - The New York Times

By Lucy Scholes

STILL LIFE WITH MONKEY By Katharine Weber 287 pp. Paul Dry Books. Paper, $16.95.

Katharine Weber’s seventh book takes its title from a work by the French Rococo artist Jean-Baptiste Oudry. Painted in 1724, “Still Life With Monkey, Fruits, and Flowers” captures a small mammal cheekily swiping grapes from a generously laden fruit bowl. Left unchecked, Ottoline, the capuchin monkey we encounter in Weber’s contemporary novel set in New Haven, gleefully engages in her own gluttonous thievery; she’s just as partial to a sweet grape, though her particular favorite is Nutella, scooped from the jar on the end of an obliging pencil.

Ottoline is a monkey helper, trained by the fictional Primate Institute of New England (the real-life model for which is the Boston-based Helping Hands) to assist those with mobility impairments. She’s been taught to fetch small items like misplaced spectacles, turn the pages of a book on command, switch on lights; all seemingly inconsequential tasks, but those the architect Duncan Wheeler, recently left quadriplegic after a car accident, is no longer able to perform for himself. Ottoline’s companionship allows Duncan periods of relative freedom otherwise impossible, his day-to-day existence now one of “careful planning and timing,” a team of personal care assistants on hand to “manage” his inert body.

Weber’s title is layered with meaning. The allusion to Duncan’s immobility is obvious, but, despite such catastrophic injuries, he is still living. What the value of his life now is, though, and whether it’s enough — these are the questions at the heart of this deeply but delicately penetrating novel. Those around Duncan are quick to remind him just how lucky he is, but he struggles to share their optimism. Indeed, the depression into which he sinks is one of the reasons his wife, Laura — an art conservator whose job, ironically, is the intricate repair of broken but often priceless objects — invites Ottoline into their home. She hopes that engagement with the animal will lift his spirits. The question of how we’re supposed to feel about Ottoline’s servitude is a tricky one. Although she’s treated lovingly, parallels between her and Duncan are clear, not least because Ottoline is also disabled (her canine and incisor teeth have been removed so she can’t bite anyone). “Living her life as it was meant to be lived — this had not been her fate.”

Indicative, perhaps, of the degree to which Duncan’s life has folded in on itself — he’s a “loose wreck,” in the words of the easily confused kid across the street, who has overheard his parents gossiping about their now rarely glimpsed neighbor — it’s the little things he’s lost that he laments the most. He’s increasingly preoccupied by the aesthetic value of these now-vanished, all too unremarkable daily routines and rhythms. As far as Duncan is concerned, his existence lacks both meaning and beauty: “Every day was now a broken series of unsuccessful gestures, and there was something ugly about this life that had once been so rich in small quotidian pleasures.” Laura too recognizes what the accident has cost them. She mourns “the easy intimacy of those thousands of ordinary frictions,” the “incandescent particles,” as Duncan himself once put it, “that sparked the vitality of their marriage.”

Weber’s prose is precise, revealing rather than evocative; she seems to be aiming not to show her characters in their best light but rather to illuminate them from all angles, even the least flattering. Befitting the novel’s emphasis on the aesthetic, her style here is painterly: As in Oudry’s composition, attention to detailed realism is everything. “Still Life With Monkey” is profoundly humane even while it’s asking the most difficult questions.

