Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/28/business/media/cbs-new-york-prosecutors.html

Title: Harassment Claims at CBS Draw Inquiries by New York Prosecutors - The New York Times

By Edmund Lee

State and local prosecutors in New York have opened inquiries into CBS regarding the sexual harassment claims made against its top leaders, including Leslie Moonves, the chief executive who was ousted from the network this month after 12 women accused him of sexual misconduct.

The Manhattan district attorney’s office and the New York City Commission on Human Rights issued subpoenas for any information related to CBS’s own investigation, according to a Securities and Exchange Commission filing by the network on Friday. The filing said the New York State attorney general has also requested information.

The network enlisted two law firms in August to investigate the allegations against Mr. Moonves, as well as claims that executives allowed a culture of harassment to fester. A separate examination of CBS News — underway since March — has been folded into the larger investigation.

Mr. Moonves was the subject of two New Yorker articles in which a total of a dozen women accused him of sexual harassment going back several decades. His departure was a stunning end for an executive who is credited with turning CBS into television’s most-watched network.

The company, which is controlled by Shari Redstone through her family company, National Amusements, also installed a newly configured board of directors. Richard Parsons was named its interim chairman this week.

Days after the dismissal of Mr. Moonves, Jeff Fager, the longtime executive producer of “60 Minutes,” was fired. He sent a text message that threatened the career of a CBS reporter who was looking into allegations of sexual harassment made against him and Mr. Moonves.

The district attorney’s office opened an investigation after the alleged conduct at CBS was publicly reported, according to a person briefed on the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss an active investigation. That person said the inquiry was in its early stages. The district attorney’s office investigates criminal sexual assault, and the city’s Human Rights Commission investigates sexual harassment.

The New York State attorney general’s office is conducting a civil inquiry to determine whether CBS broke any laws by harboring a culture of sexual harassment, according to a person briefed on the matter, who also spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss an active investigation. It did the same in the cases of the Weinstein Company and the Manhattan restaurant the Spotted Pig. If it finds that laws have been broken, it can bring a lawsuit.

The CBS board hired Nancy Kestenbaum of Covington & Burling and Mary Jo White of Debevoise & Plimpton to conduct its internal investigation. Ms. White led the Securities and Exchange Commission during the Obama administration and was previously the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York. Ms. Kestenbaum was also a federal prosecutor with the same district.

Mr. Moonves is one of a number of high-powered entertainment figure to be ousted in the #MeToo era. The movie producer Harvey Weinstein has been accused by scores of women of sexual assault and now faces felony charges. Matt Lauer stepped down as the anchor of NBC’s most valuable news program, “Today,” after several women alleged incidents of sexual harassment. Charlie Rose of CBS and PBS left the airwaves after he, too, was implicated by multiple women. And Fox News saw the departures of the founding executive Roger E. Ailes and its top-rated host, Bill O’Reilly.

All of those men have denied any nonconsensual sexual activity.

