Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/28/nyregion/how-mike-drucker-comedy-writer-spends-his-sundays.html

Title: How Mike Drucker, Comedy Writer, Spends His Sundays - The New York Times

By Nancy A. Ruhling

Mike Drucker, a stand-up comedian and television writer for TBS’s “Full Frontal with Samantha Bee,” is a four-time Emmy nominee. He has also written for shows like NBC’s “The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon” and “Bill Nye Saves the World” on Netflix. Mr. Drucker, 34, lives on the Upper West Side of Manhattan with his PlayStation 4, Xbox, Nintendo Switch, and, he says, “the growing realization that I’m very alone in this world.”

WARM UP I always tell myself that I’m going to sleep in on the weekend, but my body always wakes me up in horror at 6 a.m. It’s as if my soul can tell that something terrible has happened. Then I open Twitter and find that yes, something terrible has happened. I spend about an hour trying to be the first person to make a joke about that terrible thing, only to find out that someone better beat me to it. It’s my way of warming up for the day.

JOG, INTERRUPTED By 8 a.m., I’m in Central Park trying to jog. And I really do mean trying. For about three or four minutes I’m doing great, then someone sends me a text alert and before I know it, I’ve spent an hour texting and tweeting while runners and cyclists and parents with strollers fly by.

THE RITUAL At some point in the day, usually around 10 or 11 a.m. after I’m worn out from jogging, I start to feel guilty that I haven’t written anything, so I start my procrastination ritual. I open my laptop and sit down, but then I get myself coffee, or I wash the dishes or I notice that there’s a spot of oil on the floor from last night’s dinner, so I clean it. I never get any writing done, which is the whole point, but my apartment is super clean.

YOU CAN ALWAYS GET WHAT YOU DON’T WANT I love science, so I frequently go the American Museum of Natural History because of the dinosaurs. I feel very territorial about them. I may wander around for an hour or even all day, but I always stop to see them even though they don’t say much. Sometimes, when I’m feeling confident that I will eventually potentially do some writing, I kill some more time by meeting a couple of friends for brunch at Tradesman in Bushwick, where they have tools on the wall. There are hammers and screwdrivers and other construction things that I can’t identify because I’m a weak man. I like the eggs Benedict but I’m embarrassed to always order the same thing, so sometimes I get something I don’t want. This is the defining feature of my life.

PLAYING WITH WHISKEY Another favorite spot is Barcade in Williamsburg, where I play classic arcade games while drinking whiskey. I collect old video games, so if it’s not too late when I get back to Manhattan, I’m likely to stop in at J & L Game or Video Games New York. There is a legitimate reason for my purchases — I regularly run a live show at Union Hall in Park Slope that makes fun of bad games, and these stores are the best places to buy them. Of course, there’s no excuse for the decade-old game I just bought based on the boy band NSYNC. I’m 34.

PANIC! AT THE CAFE Somewhere between 5 and 7 o’clock, it dawns on me that Monday is quickly approaching, and I need to get some writing done. My apartment is too distracting — there are all those unwashed dishes — and I’m a little brunch drunk so I go to a coffee shop nearby to work. It could be Filicori Zecchini, Matto Espresso or Dunkin’ Donuts.

GREAT EXPECTATIONS I often do stand-up at comedy clubs like UCB Theater in the East Village. I could be on stage for seven minutes or 30 minutes, and I talk about my personal failings in the hopes of getting the validation my parents never gave me. I know that if it doesn’t go well — and believe me, it very often doesn’t — it will ruin my night and my whole life.

NIGHT NOODLES I’m a talented amateur chef whose menu ranges from instant ramen to instant ramen with an egg dropped in. Dinner is really late, usually after 10, so I want something that I can throw together fast. In five or 10 minutes, my sad meal is done.

MURDER, HE LISTENED I use audiobooks to put me to sleep, and I tend to like ones about murder. Right now, I’m listening to “Vulgar Favors” by Maureen Orth, which is about the killing of Versace. That horrible subject seems to calm my brain, I don’t know why, but I set the timer for 30 minutes and whether it’s midnight or 1 a.m., I’m usually asleep in a fraction of that time. It makes me realize that I don’t think I’d be a good serial killer because I lack the commitment.

