Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/27/business/media/kavanaugh-blasey-ford-hearing-tv.html

Title: Kavanaugh Hearings on TV Offer Riveting Drama to a Captive Nation - The New York Times

By Michael M. Grynbaum

The Senate testimony of Christine Blasey Ford and Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh unspooled over nearly nine hours on Thursday — about the length of a prestige mini-series, binged Netflix-style in one wrenching, riveting sitting.

The mini-series contained multitudes. It was a political drama that doubled as a reality show. It was an interrogation of gender, class and power in #MeToo America. It was a duel of clashing narrators. And it had elements of a major sports broadcast, a showdown between rival squads complete with halftime commentary.

As much as the proceedings reflected a nation bitterly divided — “This is hell,” Senator Lindsey Graham, the South Carolina Republican, declared around hour seven — it also produced a rare collective civic moment. Every major broadcast and cable network suspended regular programming to carry gavel-to-gavel coverage. Americans gathered with friends and co-workers to watch. Twitter filled up with photos of airplane cabins, seat-back screens aglow with Dr. Blasey’s visage.

Digital outlets, like streaming video, make it harder to capture the size of an audience. But network executives expected Thursday’s viewership to rival the 30 million people who tuned in for another generation-defining TV event: the testimony of the Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill in 1991.

Unlike that hearing, Thursday’s drama on Capitol Hill was subject to instant analysis, dissected and framed in real time on social media. Judge Kavanaugh’s chances of confirmation seemed to fall and rise depending on the hour, as political reporters relayed tidbits from President Trump’s inner circle. Brit Hume, the veteran Fox News anchor, compared the feeling to election night of 2016, a yo-yo of emotions for partisans on both sides.

At its core was a story born of literature: two protagonists revisiting a fateful moment from decades ago. “I am terrified,” Dr. Blasey said at the start of her testimony; they were virtually the first words that the public had ever heard her say.

Later came a Judge Kavanaugh who bore little resemblance to the milquetoast man on Fox News three nights earlier. Indignant and defiant, nostrils flaring, the judge unleashed a torrent of pain and grievance, at times unable to speak as he cried in front of a national audience.

Producers had lined up the usual anchors and analysts to offer comment. But the emotions of the day were too raw to be captured by pundits alone. C-Span, the no-frills public affairs network, became a spontaneous town square for everyday Americans who lit up the channel’s phone lines, compelled to share deeply personal reactions to what they had seen.

“I’m a 76-year-old woman who was sexually molested in the second grade; this brings back so much pain,” said a woman who identified herself as Brenda of Valley Park, Mo., calling in after Dr. Blasey’s opening statement. “I have not brought this up for years until I heard this testimony, and it is just breaking my heart.”

In another call, Michelle, a 53-year-old Republican from Florida, said she was molested as a teenager by a family friend and had been too scared to say anything. Jessica, a Democrat from Chicago, described being assaulted at age 19 in college.

Not all C-Span callers were sympathetic to Dr. Blasey. “She talks like she was raped,” said Sherry, a Republican in California who said she was sexually attacked at 17. “I’m going, ‘Was she raped or not?’ I don’t understand why she’s crying now.”

Steve Scully, the stoic C-Span host who gently fielded the calls, said in an interview: “We didn’t expect this outpouring of people speaking in very powerful terms of what they have gone through.”

“It’s the emotion of the moment,” he added.

On the networks, commentators spoke of the day in historic terms. “Fifty years from now, people are going to be playing that exchange,” the CNN legal analyst Jeffrey Toobin said, singling out Dr. Blasey’s pained recollection of the boys who, she said, laughed as she was assaulted.

On Fox News — the network that President Trump was most likely to be watching — the analysts were impressed by both of the day’s speakers.

“This was extremely emotional, extremely raw, extremely credible,” Chris Wallace, the “Fox News Sunday” host, said of Dr. Blasey’s testimonial. Before lunchtime, he was calling the hearing “a disaster for the Republicans,” and Andrew Napolitano, a Fox News commentator who speaks occasionally with Mr. Trump, said, “The president cannot be happy with this.”

By evening, though, after Judge Kavanaugh’s tear-choked appearance, Mr. Wallace said the judge had delivered “exactly what a lot of people were hoping for.”

The series finale will have to wait. Judge Kavanaugh’s fate remains undecided.

And Megyn Kelly, the NBC News anchor, wondered if, for all the day’s drama, many Americans had already made up their minds.

“Most people are going about their daily business,” she said on the air. “If history is any indicator, they will look at the clips and they will look at their favorite channels tonight for affirmation of their worldview.”

