Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/27/nyregion/new-yorks-forgotten-waterways.html

Title: New York’s Forgotten Waterways - The New York Times

By Nathan Kensinger

New York likes to think of itself as a city of skyscrapers and mighty avenues, but at another level it’s really just a sloshing ground for muskrats and local waterfowl. Nathan Kensinger discovered how watery the city is when he started photographing New York’s hidden landscapes.

He’d head for an undeveloped sliver of land, start whacking his way through the bushes, and pretty soon he would find himself in front of a stream or creek that did not exist on Google Maps. Even the neighbors often did not know it was there, he said.

For Mr. Kensinger, 39, the challenge was clear: to follow the water from its source to the end, camera in hand, documenting unknown habitats, homes to beavers, oysters, herons, ospreys, sunken boats and other New York specimens. Some streams he could follow on foot; others required a canoe. Many involved an effort just to reach them.

“A lot of them are part of the sewage system, so any time it rains they get a lot of raw sewage flowing in,” he said. “Otherwise they’re very nice waterways.”

He added, “I don’t know which of these I would swim in, but certainly you can canoe through them. You can now canoe on about five miles of the Bronx River. That was a surprise.”

He found homeless camps, fishing platforms and hidden teenage hangouts. He found mounds of industrial litter and sounds of encroaching development. In Hawtree Creek by Jamaica Bay, he found waters that flooded the streets at high tide during a full moon.

Most heartening, he found community groups and public agencies working to reclaim the environments after decades of contamination and neglect.

But as some waterways returned, others were disappearing because of rising sea levels, which are overtaking wetland areas, Mr. Kensinger said.

“All have their own interesting, fascinating histories,” he said. “All have a beginning, middle and end.”

“More people should know about this landscape,” he added. “Increasingly, people are going to be forced to deal with them, especially as sea levels begin to rise. They run through residential neighborhoods. But people are not even aware of the waterway in their backyard.”

Mr. Kensinger is doing his part to change that, one toxic cleanup site — in progress or not — at a time.

