Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/28/nyregion/joyce-wadler-on-an-ocean-cruise.html

Title: The Wild Alaskan Whales Will Perform at Noon - The New York Times

By Joyce Wadler

I just got back from my first cruise, and I must tell you that if you have been feeling bored, jaded, indifferent to the banquet of life, nothing is more invigorating — not of spending time on a cruise ship, but getting off.

Perhaps it was the cruise I choose, which gave me about 3 percent Alaska and 97 percent ship, but when it was over and I took my final walk down the gangway in Seattle, my senses were electrified.

Previously, I might have ignored the hundreds of pieces of luggage lined up on the pier, but after having spent seven days on the ocean, which when you come down to it is water, which is waiting to kill you, I was overwhelmed.

So much luggage, in so many sizes and colors — why I had never noticed its beauty before? Some fools say black is black, but if you but open your eyes you will see the richness and range: dusty gray black, blue-black, black as the moment my old high school friend Sandy convinced me to take a cruise to Alaska. And the variety! Can that be a roller bag with the enchanting Hello Kitty? Lord, I do fear, thou’st made the luggage claim too beautiful this year.

Excuse me, I have an IM from a reader:

Joyce, you idiot, if you hate the ocean so much, why did you sign up for a cruise?

Reply: Oh, c’mon, like you’ve never given it up for the most seductive phrase in the universe: “Unpack once.”

Also, it was raw, untamed Alaska, with its towering, turquoise glaciers and whales and bears — how could it fail to enchant?

Off Sandy and I go to Seattle, where we and our 2,0000 new friends board an imposing, 11-story ship and head out to sea. I settle into a chair on an open deck, admire the Seattle shore, inhale the brisk sea air and decide I love cruising. Then, after an hour of breathing, the shore disappears and the only thing to see is sea. Not a lot of plot there. Time to explore the cruise ship’s pleasures: spa, pool, gym. (You are aware that a compulsion to go to the gym on vacation has now been classified by the American Psychiatric Association as an illness?) There’s also a daily activities list:

“Party Bridge.” “The Life-Changing Power of Acupuncture.” “Ping-Pong Tournament.” “Learn How to Make Your Own Coffee Mug.” “Future Cruise Consultations.” “Today’s Movie: ‘Disneynature: Bears.’”

It is while reading this list that I have a horrible realization: This is going to be a really long seven days.

But I am here for the natural wonders of Alaska, and on day three of the cruise we are to experience one of the finest: The Margerie Glacier in the Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve; 200 feet tall, one mile wide where it meets the sea and great pieces of glacier fall away. Ships are advised to get no closer to this glacier than a quarter mile. Think of Leonardo Di Caprio approaching frozen fruit bar temp in ‘Titanic” and you’ll understand why.

I am so psyched about seeing this glacier I am up prowling around the ship at 7 a.m., though we won’t reach the glacier till late morning. When we’re finally in front of it I stand on an observation deck, alone with perhaps 600 cruisemates. Maybe it’s the distance, but the glacier doesn’t seem that tall. It’s a beautiful turquoise all right, but that turquoise is streaked with rocks and dirt. It looks, to be perfectly honest, squat and grubby, like the grimy piles of ice on a New York street in March. The ship spends one hour at the glacier, and I stare at it for a long time, trying to feel whatever I am supposed to be feeling. You ladies will know what I’m talking about.

This is supposed to be exciting, how come I’m not excited? Is it me? Maybe if I change position …

The next day, in Juneau, Sandy and I go out on a whale-watching expedition on which the tour operator guarantees that passengers will see a whale or receive $100 each. Based on my extensive experience of wildlife tourism (alligators, Louisiana), this means the tour operator knows exactly where the wildlife is but they’re going to drag you around for a few hours to ratchet up the drama and sell drinks. Those YouTube videos where the whales leap entirely out of the water three feet from your nose? Enjoy those, because wherever that is happening it is not going to be anywhere near your boat. What you’ll get is two seconds of a glistening, black hump in the distance, a flick of tail, and a tour guide hollering over the P.A. system.

“Did you see that tail? How about that tail? We dragged you around for two hours for $189 and you saw a tail! Sometimes — not this time — we’ve gotten so close the passengers got sprayed by mist from the whale’s spout! That’s like having a whale blow its nose on you! Now use ‘whales breaching’ in a sentence so you can pretend to your friends back home you saw something.”

I cannot tell you how happy I was to be done with that cruise. I came back to New York and was as thrilled as when I’d first come to live here: The bicyclist doing wheelies on Fifth Avenue; the homeless guy with the sign saying, ‘Help me perpetuate my alcoholism’; the street worker who, when I was dressed up late at night after a black tie party and they’re laying blacktop on Fourteenth Street, wordlessly offers me his hand and guides me across the street. There’s more going on in a half-block in New York City than a week on a cruise.

Which reminds me, this is my last Metropolitan column. But at least I am off that ship.

