Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/27/nyregion/the-urbanist-guide-to-wild-apples.html

Title: The Urbanist Guide to Wild Apples - The New York Times

By Dave Taft

It’s about that time: New Yorkers will be spending the next several weekends heading to orchards upstate for the increasingly overcrowded ritual of apple picking.

But if you’re not after a bushel, there’s no need to leave the city, where wild apples are at their peak. At this time of year, it is satisfying to stumble on a feral apple tree while hiking, pick its fruit and contemplate its origins. Trees like these seem like vestiges of some long ago, bucolic New York City. Some may in fact be descendants of a forgotten orchard, but it is no less magical that they might simply be the result of a few very lucky seeds dislodged from a carelessly tossed apple core.

If nothing else, apples are charming historical footnotes, illustrating former uses now barely suspected in New York City’s woodlands.

There certainly were orchards in the city’s past. In fact, during the 19th century, new apple cultivars were eagerly anticipated and planted. I have read estimates that almost 14,000 apple cultivars were recognized during this golden age of the apple. Compare the paltry 90 or so estimated varieties that are commercially available today — still dominated by the ubiquitous Red Delicious. Thoreau, who in addition to “Walden” also wrote the essay “Wild Apples,” would roll over in his grave to consider his subject’s fate. He preferred to collect the fallen fruits late in the season, and he ate them outdoors. He complained that an apple eaten inside tasted “sour enough to set a squirrel’s teeth on edge and make a jay scream.”

Apples do not breed “true to seed.” That is, each seed contains a wide range of genes, and most apple flowers must be cross-pollinated to produce fruit. Unfortunately, this means the results rarely live up to their parents’ pedigrees. In fact, apples can range from mouthwatering to barely edible, wrapped in skins as red and smooth as a ladybug’s wing to scabrous brown things resembling Idaho potatoes. Of course, commercially prized varieties occur, but these are rare.

Besides their crucial moment in the Bible, and a brief appearance in Homer’s Odyssey, apples may have been cultivated as far back as the 10th century B.C. in what is now Israel. Yet they are so much a part of our culture, it is hard to tease out the botanical truth behind them. Apples made their first appearance in the New World with European settlers in the 17th century. I like to imagine them going feral with the first Puritan who ever threw an apple core over his shoulder, but then there was also Johnny Appleseed.

From there, the adaptable apple (Malus x domestica) spread everywhere.

There is an old joke: “What is worse than finding a worm in your apple? Finding half a worm.” It might not be amusing to some, but while picking wild apples, it is sage advice. No one dusts, sprays or prunes a wildling apple, and a ripening fruit is an irresistible treasure to insects, birds and mammals. It pays to look before you bite. I recall one gangly old apple tree behind an archery range in southern Brooklyn, and when no one was shooting, I could sneak through the nearby brambles to pick a few of its misshapen but delightfully tart golden apples. I recall committing to my very first bite before I noticed a few of its remaining “residents” abandoning ship.

Say what you will, that apple was delicious, so I cut out the hitchhikers and with Henry David Thoreau looking over my shoulder, baked the rest of my harvest into a miniature apple pie I can still recall. I’m quite sure those first little beasties were not the last I ingested.

