Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/28/world/asia/micronesia-plane-crash-rescue.html

Title: Their Plane Was Set to Land. The Water Rushed In. Then, the Boats Came. - The New York Times

By Austin Ramzy

HONG KONG — When Bill Jaynes realized water was rushing into the plane, he started to panic.

Mr. Jaynes, a Micronesian journalist, was aboard a plane set to land on Weno, the tiny Pacific island that is part of the Federated States of Micronesia.

“I thought we landed hard until I looked over and saw a hole in the side of the plane and water was coming in,” he said in a Facebook video, describing the landing of a Boeing 737-800 flown by Air Niugini at Chuuk International Airport on Friday morning. “And I thought, well, this is not, like, the way it’s supposed to happen.”

But then help suddenly arrived — from a flotilla of local boats that rushed to the plane, which landed short of the runway in the Chuuk lagoon, and evacuated all 47 passengers stranded aboard the aircraft. Everyone made it off alive.

“It’s just surreal,” said Mr. Jaynes, managing editor of The Kaselehlie Press, a newspaper on Pohnpei, another Micronesian island.

Matthew Colson, a Baptist missionary who lives on Weno, recorded the rescue effort and posted his interview with Mr. Jaynes on Facebook. He said the locals who rushed their boats to the scene were fisherman and construction workers, all locals.

“They’re people that come here to go to work or go to the store or bring fish to the market to sell,” Mr. Colson said. “They just jumped in their boats and started helping.”

In a statement, Air Niugini thanked the locals who had rushed to the plane’s aid, and noted that a few passengers were injured in the incident. While the airline did not provide details of the cause of the crash, it said it had received information that “the weather was very poor with heavy rain and reduced visibility at the time of incident.”

But it could have been much worse. Images posted to social media showed the small boats racing to the site of the crash, surrounding the aircraft as it slowly sank in the lagoon, just off the airport. Pictures posted by bystanders two hours after the plane crashed showed it fully submerged in the water, which is up to 100 feet deep in some places.

Chuuk Lagoon is a popular diving destination and the site of sunken Japanese ships that were bombed by the American military during World War II.

“Chuuk has lot of outboard engines and boats out there,” said Glenn Harris, an aviation security inspector for Micronesia’s Department of Transportation. “Everybody came together and rushed to the plane and rescued the passengers.”

A United States Navy underwater construction team that was working in the area also helped in the rescue by shuttling passengers and crew members to shore in an inflatable boat, the Seventh Fleet said in a statement.

Mr. Harris said initial reports suggested the plane was too low as it prepared to land and ended up short of the runway.

The United States Embassy in Micronesia said in a statement that it was working to confirm the identities and the health and safety of any American passengers board the flight.

After the crash, all flights in and out of the Chuuk International Airport were suspended. While the flight services to the island are limited, United Airlines operates a well-known “Island Hopper” flight across the Pacific from Honolulu to Guam that stops in five locations, including Chuuk.

Air Niugini is Papua New Guinea’s national carrier. Flight 73 was flying from Pohnpei, about 415 miles to the east, stopping in Chuuk before a scheduled leg to Port Moresby, the capital of Papua New Guinea.

The 13-year-old aircraft reportedly sustained damage to its wing in May, when another aircraft that was taxiing at Jacksons International Airport in Port Moresby collided with it while it was parked and unoccupied.

Mr. Jaynes, reflecting on the experience, said, “I’m alive and that’s an extremely good thing.”

