Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/28/reader-center/kavanaugh-blasey-ford-reactions.html

Title: ‘I Don’t Think People in the U.S. Know How Closely We’re Watching This’ - The New York Times

By Geneva Abdul

As transfixed as Americans were Thursday by the testimonies of Christine Blasey Ford and Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh before the Senate Judiciary Committee, so too was the world. 

Readers from South Africa to Scotland told us that they watched, with equal amounts of fascination and repulsion, the hearing in which Dr. Blasey accused Judge Kavanaugh of sexually assaulting her in high school, and he vehemently denied doing so. 

Many expressed despair for America’s future and shock over the public airing of the allegations. Others decried the spectacle of the hearing as unsubstantial and frivolous. 

Their statements have been lightly edited and condensed for clarity.

I don’t think people in the U.S. know how closely we are watching this, and I didn’t know, until now, how deeply this testimony would affect me personally. We have been watching the downfall of the American democracy for a while now. We have been watching the #MeToo movement for a while now, not knowing what to think of it. 

Well, I didn’t know until now, and there I stand watching this testimony, feeling really stupid, dragged into reality. I’ve been there. It happened to me. I only told one person. It was 28 years ago. I thought it was my fault, my responsibility. I was 13 years old. I just realized that it wasn’t. 

I hope she really understands the impact she has on all of us, around the world. And I hope she knows she’s making history. Whatever the outcome may be.

— P., Belgium

I am an outsider, and as I was watching — with great interest, I must say — the proceedings yesterday, I was wondering after listening to Judge Kavanaugh’s opening statement and the very harsh words he said about the senators from the Democratic Party whether he would be ever in a position to rule impartially in any matter involving the Democratic Party.

— Commentator, Israel

Should a judge on the Supreme Court not be independent? Kavanaugh behaved like a member of the Republican Party. 

Nobody will ever know for sure what happened in that bedroom, but we all saw what happened in the hearing room. And only on that basis Kavanaugh is totally disqualified to be a judge — at any level, let alone the Supreme Court. 

A very bad week for America on the world stage. 

— UB, Singapore

Her trauma is real and so is his anger. And if the highly emotional testimonies leave us back to the starting point regarding this specific allegation, the rational side of me turns to the only objective question at hand — does his behavior, temperament, tone and clear antipathy toward Democrats make him a suitable candidate for a lifetime appointment to a body that is supposed to be an impartial branch of government? 

— American Abroad, Dubai

Clearly there must be a better way of dealing with accusations of this sort, be they true, have foundation or simply malicious. This is just as true in the wider world as it is in this particular arena.

I don’t disbelieve either party, but then there are nothing close to facts. 

— Niall Firinne, London

America truly is the laughingstock of the world. 

Regardless of whether Kavanaugh really did what he is accused of (and how is this going to be decided with no evidence?), this is ridiculous. What is to stop anyone from making such unsubstantiated claims about anyone else in the future? What it does show is just how far towards insanity and away from common sense American society has gone. Trial by believability on TV.

— Beat, Sydney

With all the problems and issues in the world today, the United States is fussing about something a middle-aged man may or may not have done 36 years ago when he was in high school.

— Garth Stevenson, Grimsby, Ontario

I simply cannot imagine any country in Europe carrying out such a bizarre hearing, least of all one for all the world to see. It showed the U.S. in a very poor light. 

Some might say that it was at least transparent, but what it showed was a country massively at odds with itself and in no way fit to lead in the world. 

— Garry Taylor, Lewes, U.K.

Your country has lost the plot. It’s not about power and my seat in Congress, it’s about inequality and disenfranchisement. Shame on the Democrats, too. Archaic political system.

— PM, Australia

If this is the best America can do to fill one of nine seats on the highest court in the land, America is a country in serious decline.

— John Townsend, Mexico 

I have visited America more times than I can count and always loved the country, and most of the people I met were friendly, welcoming and open. I watch in despair as America slides back into the Dark Ages and loses its reputation on the international stage. It is really very sad seeing America implode. 

— Kate McRoberts, New Zealand

This is not good for America. Trump & Co. may bulldoze and taste temporary success in trade wars.

But the genuine cries of women may not be that easy to ignore! Times are changing.

— NsMurthy, India

This story has obviously touched a raw nerve in so many men and women in the U.S. and around the world. Perhaps it is a turning point (one can only hope) in men finally getting it. 

Women need to be heard and respected as they have not been up until now. 

— Greg Hodges, Truro, Nova Scotia

The United States is burning through unbelievable amounts of good will. You can do better.

— Oscar, Sweden

A note to readers who are not subscribers: This article from the Reader Center does not count toward your monthly free article limit.

Follow the @ReaderCenter on Twitter for more coverage highlighting your perspectives and experiences and for insight into how we work.

