Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/22/opinion/sunday/immigration-children-detention.html

Title: Coming of Age in American Detention
Subtitle: As 17-year-olds they were asylum seekers. On their 18th birthdays they became criminals.
By The Editorial Board

In the fall of 2017, Wilmer Ramirez had reason to be hopeful. After he trekked from Guatemala and spent several months in a youth migrant shelter in Arizona, his application for “special immigrant juvenile status,” a designation that would make him eligible for lawful permanent residency, was pending. What’s more, a family in Pennsylvania had agreed to sponsor him, meaning they would submit themselves to the Office of Refugee Resettlement for approval and take him in once they were approved. The only thing between him and freedom, then, was a little more paperwork.

But when he turned 18, federal Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials came to the shelter, placed him in handcuffs, and carted him off to a nearby jail.

He hadn’t done anything wrong. The officials were just following the rules. When children become adults, the Office of Refugee Resettlement, which is part of the Department of Health and Human Services, turns them over to the Department of Homeland Security, which places them in “adult detention,” a term that usually means county jail. Exact numbers are difficult to come by, but roughly 1,000 18-year-olds were sent to such detentions in 2017, according to Mr. Ramirez’s lawyers, who have filed a class-action lawsuit challenging the practice. 

The transfer from shelter to jail can be abrupt; it often happens at midnight on detainees’ 18th birthday and typically cuts them off from any relationships they might have established, including with caseworkers and counselors. 

There are many things wrong with this policy. There is no dark magic that turns teenagers into criminals on their 18th birthday, even if they were born outside the United States. Given the damage that incarceration can do to young adults, every alternative should be pursued before turning teenage asylum seekers over to adult detention. And, as the Ramirez lawsuit indicates, the procedure itself may be illegal. Federal law requires ICE to place children and teenagers in the least restrictive setting possible, even after they turn 18. 

Critics say the number of migrant children who face jail as they “age out” of youth shelters is climbing, and it’s easy to see why. The number of detained migrant children has already quintupled since last year, largely because children are being held in shelters longer. The average length of stay has increased from 34 days in 2015 to almost 60 days now, and many children are kept much longer. Yearlong stays are not uncommon, and cases of 500 days or more have been reported. As those numbers grow, the entire shelter system (some 100 facilities scattered across the country) is nearing capacity.

The best of those shelters may feel like havens to children who fled extreme poverty or violence, and faced incredible risks to make it across the border. The worst shelters are dens of abuse and neglect. At either end of the spectrum, the children themselves face tedium, a lack of freedom and profound uncertainty, especially when their 18th birthday approaches. “It’s a really anxiety-inducing period,” says one of Mr. Ramirez’s lawyers, Kate Melloy Goettel. “We try to prepare them for it, but it can be hard to grasp.” 

Health and Human Services officials have said that the longer stays are an unfortunate but inevitable byproduct of improved safety precautions: It takes time to verify that prospective sponsors are who they claim to be, and to ensure that these already vulnerable and traumatized minors won’t be subjected to abuse once they leave the care of the Office of Refugee Resettlement. As proof of the necessity of their diligence, they point to a handful of children who were unwittingly placed with human traffickers in 2014.

That argument withers under scrutiny. Yes, the threat of trafficking is real, and protections are needed to guard against it. But it’s difficult to see how incarcerating teenagers for the crime of turning 18 protects them more than, say, releasing them to a willing sponsor who has cleared a basic but thorough background check. Stricter requirements have succeeded in scaring off prospective sponsors, many of whom are undocumented themselves or who have undocumented relatives. But their fear does not necessarily speak to their fitness as guardians.

There are other options, in any case: Immigration advocates, including Mr. Ramirez's lawyers, have proposed releasing teenagers like Mr. Ramirez to sponsors, with ankle monitors if need be, or to group homes or shelters for young adults. 

Instead, the Department of Health and Human Services is doubling down on current practices. As Yahoo News reported, the department is planning to take some $260 million from its other programs, including ones for public preschool and cancer research, to expand the capacity of shelters for detained migrant children, including at a tent city in Tornillo, Tex., that was supposed to be temporary and will now grow from 400 beds to 3,800. Officials are also angling to pull out of a longstanding judicial agreement that prohibits the indefinite detention of migrant children. And, rather than consider or sensibly settle the class-action lawsuit brought by Mr. Ramirez (who has since been released) and other 18-year-olds over their incarceration, federal lawyers have sought, unsuccessfully, to have the case thrown out of court.

More than 200,000 migrant children have entered the United States in the past six years, according to a recent Senate report; too many of them have been misplaced, or mistreated, or deported without a fair hearing.

Mr. Ramirez was just 17 when he crossed the American border, and he had already spent nearly a decade working under slave-like conditions in the coffee fields of his native Guatemala. But if he and others like him assumed the burdens of adulthood long before they arrived in Texas or California or Arizona, they are still teenagers. They deserve as much protection and support as teenagers born in this country — or in any other. We have the ways and means to provide that protection and support. We just need the will and the decency.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).

