Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/19/opinion/kavanaugh-accusations-democrats-senate-hearing.html

Title: What the Kavanaugh Accusations Mean for Red-State Democrats
Subtitle: Things just got a lot more complicated for Joe Manchin.
By Michael Tomasky

A view seems to have taken hold in Washington that the sexual assault allegations against Brett Kavanaugh by Christine Blasey Ford have let red-state Senate Democrats off the hook. These Democrats — chiefly Joe Donnelly of Indiana, Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota and Joe Manchin of West Virginia, the three Democrats who voted to confirm Neil Gorsuch in April 2017 — all face re-election in just seven weeks in states where President Trump is popular, and where majorities presumably would support Judge Kavanaugh’s elevation to the Supreme Court.

But now, some say, the allegations against the nominee provide reason enough for them to vote no. Jim Manley, a former longtime Democratic Senate aide who knows these matters well, told Reuters on Tuesday: “For those Democrats up for re-election from states that Trump carried, they now have absolutely no reason to vote for Kavanaugh. Period. End of story. They have all the cover they need.” Several talking heads on cable news said much the same thing Tuesday.

I’m not sure it’s that simple. Assuming Judge Kavanaugh’s nomination is not withdrawn and the Republicans continue to fight for him, these three Democrats and possibly one or two others will still find themselves in a tough position. In fact, if a couple of Republicans defect from Judge Kavanaugh, these Democrats will be in an even tougher spot than before. 

Imagine this hypothetical. Susan Collins and Lisa Murkowski, the two Republican senators who are under the most pressure to oppose confirmation, decide to do so. That takes Judge Kavanaugh down to 49 votes. Game over.

Except maybe not. At that point, Republicans, far from accepting defeat, will surely start aiming fire at the three Democrats. Their opponents will taunt them about Judge Kavanaugh on the campaign trail. Right-wing money will pour in to their states for pro-Kavanaugh (and pro-Trump) TV ads. Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader in the Senate, will let this play out and may schedule the vote for as late as he can — mid-October, even late October — to make the Democrats sweat.

That will constitute enormous pressure on the red-state Democrats. If they sense their opponents are gaining steam, they may well think: Why should I cast a vote that’s going to cost me my seat? Especially when even if we defeat Judge Kavanaugh, we’re just going to get someone else who’s every bit as conservative?

If one of them moves to a pro-Kavanaugh position, it’s likely that all three will move. Here’s why. There is a standing agreement among minority parties in the Senate that in such situations, no one wants to be the 50th vote. The lone senator who provides the 50th vote can be blamed and reviled. But if all three move together, then one of them can’t be singled out as having cast the dreaded 50th vote. This is one big reason there are so few 50-to-50 votes in the Senate. In fact, when one side sees it has lost, a couple other senators who can afford to cast the vote will often join in to give their colleagues cover.

Beginning to see how this works?

Now imagine a second scenario. Imagine that Ms. Collins and Ms. Murkowski vote no, but this time they are joined by two other Republicans, Jeff Flake of Arizona and Bob Corker of Tennessee. Now, Judge Kavanaugh is down to 47 votes. And more important, the air will be out of his balloon, emotionally. At that point, I think the three Democrats will be fully off the hook.

And, of course, there’s a third scenario (at least!), which I discussed here earlier, and it’s probably still the most likely one. All 51 Republicans stand pat, in which case some Democrats will go ahead and confirm Judge Kavanaugh. But their votes won’t matter. Whether you got 51 votes or 55 or 100, they still call you Mr. Associate Justice.

If all this is maddening to you, I can’t say I blame you. Why don’t they just do the right thing?

Well, sure. But here it gets more complicated still. What’s the right thing?

The Democrats, say the experts, now have a chance of recapturing control of the Senate. Their candidates are looking good in Nevada and Arizona and are competitive in Tennessee and even Texas.

That majority would hinge on winning three of those four seats. But it would also depend on red-state senators like Mr. Donnelly, Ms. Heitkamp and Mr. Manchin holding theirs. Voting against Judge Kavanaugh might jeopardize that.

In the long run, what’s better: the Democrats helping to confirm Judge Kavanaugh and winning a majority, or standing firm against him but remaining the minority?

Many would say it doesn’t have to come down to those two choices, and they’re right. All this is unknowable. In the Democrats’ dream world, they defeat Judge Kavanaugh, win the majority, block the Republicans from getting a nominee through in the lame-duck session and then keep the seat open for two years. That could happen, too!

All will hinge on a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on the sexual assault allegations, scheduled for Monday. If Ms. Blasey looks convincing, if Judge Kavanaugh looks evasive. … But don’t think the mere accusations doom the nominee with all Democrats. This news isn’t playing in Bismarck and Charleston the way it’s playing in Washington and New York. Red-state senators probably need still a little more cover.

Michael Tomasky is a columnist for The Daily Beast, editor of Democracy: A Journal of Ideas and a contributing opinion writer.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion).

