Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/27/nyregion/dan-donovan-staten-island-trump-max-rose.html

Title: Democrats Hope to Beat New York City’s Only G.O.P. Congressman. It Won’t Be Easy. - The New York Times

By Lisa W. Foderaro

Three days before a bitterly contested congressional primary, Representative Dan Donovan, the Republican incumbent, wanted to leave no doubt with voters at an anti-tax rally that he was the candidate preferred by President Trump.

Lawn signs and placards would not be enough: His campaign unveiled a mobile two-story-tall billboard that blared Mr. Trump’s endorsement.

But after Mr. Donovan defeated his rival, Michael Grimm, the former congressman and federal tax felon, in June, Mr. Donovan’s embrace of Mr. Trump is something less than full-throated.

Gone are the lawn signs that paired Mr. Donovan’s name with the Trump logo; in their place are signs that proclaim “Solutions, Results.”

As Mr. Donovan, the city’s lone Republican congressman, faces a feisty challenge in the general election from the Democratic candidate, Max Rose, Mr. Donovan seems to be moving toward the center. In a district that has more registered Democrats than Republicans, yet skews heavily conservative, the question now is whether Mr. Trump’s support may hurt more than it helps in November.

The issue is one that is playing out across the country, but is particularly germane in New York City, where Mr. Trump is deeply unpopular.

“I don’t think he’ll be talking about that bill to put Trump’s mug in every post office in America,” said Richard Flanagan, a professor of political science at the College of Staten Island. He was referring to legislation that Mr. Donovan had sponsored to ensure that every post office displayed a photograph of the president.

“It’s a scramble to the middle; it really is,” Professor Flanagan said.

Similarly, Mr. Rose, a 31-year-old Army veteran and former health care executive, is trying his best to court the center by winning over unaffiliated voters, as well as Republicans disenchanted with Mr. Trump. In one of two recent television ads, he even goes after a stalwart of his own party, Mayor Bill de Blasio.

“Look,” he says into the camera from a sidewalk in the district. “I’m running against Dan Donovan. But the truth is, he’s not the only one doing a lousy job. Mayor de Blasio acts like Staten Island doesn’t even exist. And we need to get rid of all the leadership in D.C. — Republican and Democrat.”

Mr. Rose is by no means a far-left liberal — for example, he does not espouse abolishing Immigration and Customs Enforcement — but Republican leaders on Staten Island chuckled at the notion that he was an anti-establishment candidate.

They point out that he was one of the first congressional challengers named to the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee’s “red to blue” program, which supports candidates it believes can help flip Congress in November. Mr. Rose has also received endorsements from Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and the former vice president Joseph R. Biden Jr.

The imprimatur from the committee no doubt gave Mr. Rose a financial boost. His campaign recorded $1.9 million in donations through the end of June, compared with Mr. Donovan’s $1.8 million.

“Max Rose is pretending that he is not a progressive liberal, while at the same time accepting the endorsement of Andrew Cuomo,” said Brendan T. Lantry, chairman of the Staten Island Republican Party. “Staten Islanders won’t be fooled.”

For Mr. Rose, however, distancing himself from Mr. de Blasio makes perfect political sense, even though he insisted in an interview that it had “nothing to do with political strategy.” Polls have consistently shown that Mayor de Blasio’s popularity has lagged on Staten Island, a borough that tried to secede from New York City in the 1990s.

Rather than fixating on broad progressive themes, the Rose campaign has drilled down to issues affecting the 11th Congressional District, which includes all of Staten Island and a slice of South Brooklyn. Republicans and Democrats alike worry about traffic congestion, worsening subway service and the toll of opioid addiction, issues that Mr. Rose said he would take on more aggressively than Mr. Donovan.

“The mythical Reagan Democrat still exists on Staten Island,” Professor Flanagan said. “The anti-de Blasio commercials are aimed at them. De Blasio is just an unpopular figure. There is an antipathy toward urban liberals in general.”

Determined to avoid making the general election a referendum on President Trump, Mr. Donovan has focused on Staten Island’s proud local identity and thorny problems. He highlights his deep roots in the district: He is a native of the borough and has spent nearly a quarter century in public service, first as deputy borough president, then as a three-term district attorney and now as a congressman.

Mr. Donovan, the former Staten Island district attorney, described Mr. Rose as “a blank slate” and said, “He’s only lived in Staten Island for a very short period of time.”

And as Election Day approaches, Mr. Donovan is showcasing the times that he parted company with the White House, most notably with his votes against replacing the Affordable Care Act and against the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Both were pieces of legislation that Mr. Trump championed but that Mr. Donovan said would have hurt his constituents.

“I may not have voted with the president every time,” he said in a phone interview, “but I voted 100 percent of the time with my community.”

He said his proudest legislative moment came immediately after he was sworn in by John A. Boehner, who was the House speaker when Mr. Donovan took office in 2015. The issue was whether to extend critical parts of the Zadroga bill, which provided health care for emergency workers who risked their lives on Sept. 11, 2001, or in the recovery and cleanup efforts.

“That was the very first thing I did in Congress,” he said. “At 6:45 on a Tuesday evening, Speaker Boehner swore me in and at 6:50 I signed onto the Zadroga bill and advocated for the passage of that. There were many people, most of them on my side of the aisle, who didn’t want to give permanent health care to those brave women and men.”

It is unclear whether voters will view the general election as a referendum on the Trump presidency or as a local contest about local issues. But political observers say that Mr. Donovan is benefiting from his status as an incumbent (with all the name recognition it affords) and his push-pull relationship with Mr. Trump.

“Donovan is in a sweet spot right now,” Professor Flanagan said.

“He has the Trump endorsement, but he has also bucked the president on two big bills. Max Rose has his work cut out for him because he can’t simply say, ‘Trump is horrible; I’m going to run against Trump.’ That probably doesn’t get him enough votes.”

