Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/28/us/politics/duncan-hunter-attack-ad.html

Title: Duncan Hunter Airs Ad Suggesting Opponent Is Terrorist Sympathizer - The New York Times

By Jennifer Steinhauer

Representative Duncan Hunter, the California Republican whose re-election campaign has been imperiled by a federal indictment, has released a startling attack against his Democratic challenger, suggesting that he is an Islamic terrorist sympathizer and national security risk.

“Ammar Campa-Najjar is working to infiltrate Congress,” says the narrator of Mr. Hunter’s ad, released on YouTube, in reference to the Democrat running against him. “He’s used three different names to hide his family’s ties to terrorism.”

Mr. Campa-Najjar, who until Mr. Hunter’s troubles was considered a very long shot to win a predominantly Republican district in the San Diego suburbs, has a Mexican-American mother and a father who immigrated from the Middle East. His paternal grandfather, Muhammad Youssef al-Najjar, was involved with the plan to murder Israeli athletes at the Olympic Games in Germany in 1972; he was assassinated by Israeli military commandos in 1973.

Mr. Campa-Najjar has repeatedly denounced his grandfather’s actions. He is Christian and has often stressed his church activities.

In a statement Friday, Mr. Campa-Najjar said, “It’s sad to see Congressman Hunter lose his grip on reality.’’ He said that as a former member of the White House, he was “given a security clearance by the Secret Service after a thorough background check.”

Taking a jab at Mr. Hunter’s legal trouble, he added, “He knows I’m not responsible for my family’s actions, just like his wife isn’t responsible for his.”

Both campaigns did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

Mr. Hunter’s ad is an escalation of comments he made about his opponent earlier this week, according to local reports, when he emphasized that Mr. Campa-Najjar legally changed his name to Joseph from Yasser.

A spokesperson for Mr. Campa-Najjar said that he had been given the middle name Yasser, his father’s first name, in keeping with Arabic naming traditions, and that he changed it to Joseph because he preferred it.

“That is how hard, by the way, that the radical Muslims are trying to infiltrate the U.S. government,” Mr. Duncan said at a campaign event. “You had more Islamists run for office this year at the federal level than ever before in U.S. history.”

Painting Democratic House challengers as friendly with terrorists has emerged as a minor theme this fall. The Congressional Leadership Fund, which supports Republican House candidates, put out an ad suggesting that Aftab Pureval, who is running against Representative Steve Chabot in Ohio, has ties to Libya. Abigail Spanberger, who is challenging Representative Dave Brat in Virginia, is being attacked for ties to an Islamic Academy in Northern Virginia where she briefly taught English as she waited for security clearance from the Central Intelligence Agency.

Mr. Duncan was indicted in August on charges of misusing campaign funds for personal use. His lawyers have said the action was politically motivated.

