Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/28/nyregion/bill-de-blasio-emails.html

Title: Just Say ‘No’ to Cuomo: Secret Emails Reveal de Blasio’s Gripes and Grudges - The New York Times

By Jeffery C. Mays

“Teeing off” on Rudolph Giuliani. Telling City Hall aides to uniformly reject requests from the Cuomo administration. 

These are some of Mayor Bill de Blasio’s sharpest-edged moments seen in a final batch of more than 14,000 pages of emails released by the city on Thursday. The de Blasio administration had sought to keep the emails private, arguing that the communications — between City Hall officials and a group of outside advisers — should not be subjected to Freedom of Information requests because the advisers were essentially functioning as “agents of the city.”

The city ultimately lost its argument. In a first batch of emails, released in May, Mr. de Blasio lashed out at his advisers and staff members, often irritated that his message was not getting through to the media, Albany and elsewhere.

This batch of emails, which cover the early days of the administration, further expands the window into the mayor’s psyche. 

 

Just a few weeks into his first term, Mr. de Blasio was criticized for calling a top police official on behalf of a political supporter who had been arrested during a traffic stop. But he got some support from a surprising corner: the former mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani. “I don’t think he did anything wrong,” Mr. Giuliani was quoted as saying to The New York Times. “He’s a new mayor. Give him a break.” 

On Feb. 12, 2014, Mr. de Blasio wrote an email that went to several people, including his wife, Chirlane McCray, and Patrick Gaspard, one of the outside advisers. “I didn’t think I was likely to write this sentence,” Mr. de Blasio wrote. “Pls sched a call with Rudy Giuliani tmrw so I can thank him.” One of those who got the email, Emma Wolfe, a top aide, advised the mayor not to make the call, saying that it could prolong a negative story if Mr. Giuliani told other people about the conversation.

Ms. Wolfe then allowed that she was being “maybe too paranoid.” It is not clear from the emails if the call was made. 

The good will, however, had evaporated by September 2015, when Mr. Giuliani wrote an op-ed piece in The New York Post criticizing Mr. de Blasio’s policy toward the homeless. The mayor wrote to Mr. Gaspard, who was then the United States ambassador to South Africa: “Need to know what kind of teeing off will work.” Mr. Gaspard replied with a fiery email: “This creep is lecturing on a policy that failed under him,” and recommended that Mr. de Blasio fight back. 

Within days, Mr. de Blasio was following Mr. Gaspard’s advice. He acknowledged that the city had a homeless problem but said that it went back decades and was made worse by Mr. Giuliani’s policies. 

After winning election as mayor, Mr. de Blasio was in demand on talk shows such as “The Daily Show with Jon Stewart,” and Mr. de Blasio was clearly prepped for the appearances.

Mr. de Blasio’s adviser, Rebecca Katz, gave the mayor a complete rundown before one such appearance. Her email listed appearances by other politicians such as Condoleezza Rice and Elizabeth Warren that were “successful,” and Mike Huckabee and President Barack Obama, which were “flat.”

Ms. Katz said that Mr. de Blasio should make self-deprecating jokes (“Dante doesn’t get up before 10, I guess he learned that from me”), laugh at Mr. Stewart’s jokes and smile throughout the interview. 

The emails show that it took almost no time for animosity to emerge between Mr. de Blasio and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo. The mayor had wanted to pay for his prekindergarten program through a millionaire’s tax, but Mr. Cuomo made no secret of his disdain for the idea. Mr. de Blasio’s feelings for the governor were equally uncharitable; in a Feb. 16, 2014, email, an aide wrote that Mr. de Blasio said of the governor: “I will restrain myself but only up to a point.” 

He appears to have reached that point by December 2014. Emails show a series of angry and agonized exchanges after Patrick J. Lynch, the police union president in New York City, orchestrated a protest where some officers signed forms asking the mayor not to attend their funerals if they should be killed in the line of duty. (The protest came after a grand jury chose not to bring charges in the case of Eric Garner, who died after a police officer put him in a chokehold; Mr. de Blasio subsequently said that he and his wife had instructed their son “on how to take special care” in encounters with police officers.) 

The City Hall emails raised the possibility that Mr. Cuomo might act as an intermediary to smooth the waters with Mr. Lynch. But after Mr. Cuomo gave a radio interview defending Mr. Lynch, Mr. de Blasio had heard enough. 

“And from now on: The answer to any and all requests from the Cuomo Administration is NO,” the mayor wrote. “The default position is NO. Then we will decide if and when there should be any yesses.”

The exchanges also include a remarkable scolding by Mr. de Blasio directed at his closest aides. “Guys, you are as good as it gets in this work,” he tells them. “But you are also not me, and therefore not relating fully to my thoughts and feelings.”

As part of a push to appear less hostile toward charter schools, Mr. de Blasio took to the pulpit of Riverside Church in Manhattan to explain his position. The only problem: The Rev. Dr. James Alexander Forbes Jr. wanted the mayor to keep his remarks to 15 minutes.

“Forbes is saying today he wants you to cut down remarks because it is Lent and because he has his own sermon he’s working on,” Ms. Wolfe wrote to Mr. de Blasio. 

Ms. Wolfe went on to say that Mr. Forbes “has always said the same to presidents” such as Bill Clinton, using the abbreviation “wjc” for President Clinton’s full name, William Jefferson Clinton. 

Mr. de Blasio wrote that he would try to keep it to 15 minutes, but later suggested that he call Mr. Forbes and “reassure him” but also “brush him back a little.” Others, including Marco A. Carrión, commissioner of the community affairs unit, and Rachel Noerdlinger, an aide to Mr. de Blasio’s wife Chirlane McCray, worked behind the scenes to try to get the mayor more time.

In a final email, sent at a 1 a.m. the day of the speech, Mr. de Blasio said it was “a real problem” to be limited to 15 minutes. “I will make do, but it won’t be as good a speech,” the mayor said, adding that had he known he would only get 15 minutes he would “have moved to another location.” 

In March 2015, Mr. de Blasio saw an airplane crash in Europe as an opportunity for his wife, Ms. McCray, to raise her profile as a mental health advocate. Investigators determined that a suicidal pilot had deliberately crashed the plane into the French Alps.

“I strongly believe Chirlane should call today for mental health screening for all pilots,” Mr. de Blasio wrote to a group of top aides on March 27, three days after the crash. “It is clearly necessary, and I think many people would appreciate her making the point.”

He went on to urge his staff not to react too cautiously. “And let me pre-empt all the traditional objections to taking action: I am going on instinct here,” he wrote. “My advice: don’t scrub too much or hesitate too much, just strike while the iron is hot. Find a way to get something out today that gets notice, maybe follow behind it with a HuffPo piece. This will add to her identification on mental health, and it’s a message that needs to be heard.”

Ms. McCray eventually wrote a letter published in The New York Times, recommending mental health screenings for pilots, and calling for the nation to “change the culture so that people realize that seeking treatment for mental illness is an act of strength, not weakness.”

 

