Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/27/us/mark-judge-kavanaugh-hearings.html

Title: Mark Judge Says He’ll Talk to the F.B.I. Here’s What We Know About Him. - The New York Times

By Matthew Haag

Mark Judge, who has been named by two women as being a key witness to sexual misconduct by Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh, said Friday that he would cooperate with any law enforcement agency “assigned to confidentially investigate” the accusations.

The statement came in a letter to the Senate Judiciary Committee after the full Senate decided to delay a vote on Judge Kavanaugh’s nomination to the Supreme Court so the F.B.I. could conduct an investigation of up to one week into the allegations.

A high school friend of Judge Kavanaugh, Mr. Judge quickly became a significant but elusive figure. His name was repeatedly brought up on Thursday during testimony by one of the women, Christine Blasey Ford, and Judge Kavanaugh before the Senate Judiciary Committee.

But Mr. Judge has avoided the public spotlight in recent weeks, at one point holed up at a Delaware beach house, denying the allegations through a lawyer.

Democratic senators pressed Judge Kavanaugh about his relationship with Mr. Judge and lamented that he had not been called as a witness by the Republican majority that controls the process.

[Catch up on the news with this  guide to The New York Times’s coverage of the accusations against Brett Kavanaugh]

Mr. Judge is now an author, filmmaker and journalist who has written for conservative publications including The Daily Caller and The Weekly Standard. He had active profiles on Facebook and YouTube until his name surfaced in recent weeks, but those pages have since been removed. News stories have focused on “Wasted,” his 1997 memoir, which describes his alcohol-fueled years as a student at Georgetown Preparatory School in Maryland, where he was Mr. Kavanaugh’s close friend and classmate.

Judge Kavanaugh has repeatedly denied the allegations made by Dr. Blasey and a second woman, Julie Swetnick, as well as an accusation by a Yale classmate, Deborah Ramirez, that he exposed himself to her at a drunken college party.

On Thursday, Dr. Blasey, who also goes by her married name, Ford, repeated her accusations under oath, including her allegation about Mr. Judge’s role, stating that he was in the room at a suburban Maryland home in the early 1980s when a drunken Judge Kavanaugh pinned her on a bed, grabbed at her body and clothes, and covered her mouth to keep her from screaming.

She also said that music was playing in the room when one of them pushed her into it, and that one of the teenagers had turned it up. She describes a drunk Mr. Judge as a jumpy and at times conflicted accomplice to assault.

“Both Brett and Mark were drunkenly laughing during the attack. They seemed to be having a very good time,” Dr. Blasey said. “Mark seemed ambivalent, at times urging Brett on and at times telling him to stop. A couple of times I made eye contact with Mark and thought he might try to help me, but he did not.”

She said she had never forgotten “the uproarious laughter between the two and their having fun at my expense.

“I was underneath one of them while the two laughed,” she testified. “Two friends having a really good time together.”

Dr. Blasey said Mr. Judge jumped on top of them twice, causing everyone to tumble off the bed and onto the floor the second time. That allowed her to get out of the room and hide in a bathroom, she said.

“I heard Brett and Mark leave the bedroom laughing and loudly walk down the narrow stairs, pinballing off the walls on the way down,” she said, adding that when she could no longer hear them, she ran downstairs and left the house.

Weeks later, Dr. Blasey testified, she saw Mr. Judge working at a Safeway grocery store in Potomac, Md. In his memoir, Mr. Judge mentioned that he had worked for a few weeks at a supermarket in the summer before his senior year, helping people load groceries into their cars. He wrote that he often showed up at his early-morning shift hung over from the night before.

“I said ‘hello’ to him,” she said. “His face was white and very uncomfortable saying ‘hello’ back.”

She added, “He was just nervous and not really wanting to speak with me, and he looked a little bit ill.”

Mr. Judge has disputed this account through his lawyer. In an interview with The New York Times before Dr. Blasey’s name became public, Mr. Judge described high school parties he attended as being mostly small, taking place after football games in basements while parents were asleep upstairs.

“I never saw anything like that,” he said in the interview. “The way it was described is even bizarre, about turning up the music and all this other stuff. It’s no situation I recall ever being in.”

Mr. Judge suggested the allegations were driven by politics. “Any intelligent person knows what’s motivating it,” he said.

Certain details of Dr. Blasey’s account resemble his own broad portrait of high school years filled with binge drinking and accounts by former Georgetown Prep students who attended the all-boys school at the same time.

In their 1983 yearbook, a photo of football players in pads and uniform showed Mr. Judge and Mr. Kavanaugh grinning side by side. Mr. Judge’s yearbook page says he was a member of the club “100 KEGS or Bust” and includes the quotation, “Certain women should be struck regularly, like gongs.”

Some former classmates of the two men have said that aspects of Dr. Blasey’s recollections of Mr. Judge rang true.

The book describes a person named “Bart O’Kavanaugh” as having “puked in someone’s car the other night” and “passed out on his way back from a party.” A former classmate of Judge Kavanaugh’s said that the judge earned the nickname “Bart” after a Georgetown Prep teacher garbled his name.

In the hearing Thursday, Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, pressed Judge Kavanaugh about the “Bart O’Kavanaugh” passage. Mr. Kavanaugh said that the book was a “fictionalized” account and that only Mr. Judge could answer about his intention.

A statement by Ms. Swetnick painted a similar portrait of the two young men as “attached to the hip” in high school and made allegations of parties where women were drugged and “gang raped.” Ms. Swetnick has not been interviewed by journalists or offered corroboration of her account. On Wednesday, Mr. Judge denied her allegations through his lawyer, Barbara Van Gelder.

Under questioning Thursday, Judge Kavanaugh said that he and Mr. Judge became friends in ninth grade and that they shared the same group of friends. Mr. Judge was popular in school, Judge Kavanaugh said, and a talented writer.

But Mr. Judge later developed a serious addiction that lasted decades, he said, and was near death a couple of times. He “suffered tremendously,” Judge Kavanaugh said, adding that they had not talked in several years but might have been included on mass emails sent among old friends.

