Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/28/us/politics/republicans-kavanaugh-supreme-court.html

Title: Republicans See Kavanaugh and the Court as Worth the Risk - The New York Times

By Carl Hulse

With his disputed nomination headed to the Senate floor, Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh himself may have best summed up the reason Republicans are so eager to move him on to the Supreme Court despite a toxic struggle over his confirmation.

“As we all know, in the United States political system of the early 2000s, what goes around comes around,” Judge Kavanaugh declared Thursday in one of several biting references to the brute-force politics he is quite familiar with from his own time in the White House and the partisan arena.

That knowing observation points to one explanation why Republicans have been so determined to overcome furious Democratic objections that Republicans are rushing, and brushing aside credible accusations of sexual assault against him.

Republicans know this may be their last, best opportunity to cement a conservative majority on the Supreme Court for a generation. They want to seize it despite evident political risk.

“Frankly, we have a reached a point where it is time to end this circus,” Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, demanded Friday at a meeting of the divided Judiciary Committee. “It’s time to vote.”

Republicans are painfully aware that should Judge Kavanaugh stall and Democrats somehow take back the Senate in the midterm elections only six weeks away, Republicans could lose a historic opportunity to remake the high court because Democrats could block any nomination by President Trump.

And Democrats know they could block any Trump nominee for months or even years because Republicans did so to Judge Merrick B. Garland, President Barack Obama’s nominee in 2016, and appeared to pay little political price for it. In fact, it worked to their benefit.

Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, who rocked Thursday’s hearing and shifted the course of the Kavanaugh nomination with a scorching assault on Democrats, acknowledged Republican concern about the Democratic intentions.

“What you want to do is destroy this guy’s life, hold this seat open and hope you win in 2020,” Mr. Graham charged, referring to the next presidential election. “You want this seat? I hope you never get it.”

Though Judge Kavanaugh’s nomination was approved Friday afternoon by the Senate Judiciary Committee on a straight party-line vote, Senator Jeff Flake, Republican of Arizona, provided some drama by announcing that he and a few other senators would withhold their support on confirmation unless a new F.B.I. investigation was ordered to explore the accusations that Mr. Kavanaugh assaulted a woman at a teenage gathering.

Republican leaders had resisted opening such an investigation for days but had no choice but to accede to Mr. Flake’s demand because they lacked the necessary votes without him. Still, the leaders were keeping the machinery of the nomination moving to be ready to force a final vote as soon as the F.B.I. reports back within a week as directed.

The 2016 fight over Mr. Obama’s nominee is unanimously seen as benefiting Republicans in that year’s elections. By holding open the vacancy created by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, provided a strong election-year motivation for conservative voters who ended up supporting Mr. Trump so he could fill the seat instead of Hillary Clinton, a Democrat. Mr. Trump won and Republicans held the Senate majority despite their own concerns that they might lose it.

But the political implications of moving ahead on Mr. Kavanaugh with such charged questions swirling around him could play out differently in the midterm elections in November. Republicans are already facing a significant gender gap in public polling, and a decision to confirm Judge Kavanaugh despite the compelling testimony of Christine Blasey Ford that he assaulted her when they were teenagers could exacerbate their struggles with female voters.

Despite a Senate electoral map that works against them, Democrats could capitalize on the court fight to put control of the chamber within reach while also helping the party in its more likely push to gain control of the House.

Republicans are aware of this possibility. But they — and particularly their leader, Mr. McConnell — see the court as the main prize, one worth a political gamble. Mr. McConnell has proudly proclaimed the decision to hold open the Scalia seat as one of his greatest accomplishments, and he has been devoted to working hand-in-hand with the White House to fill scores of federal court vacancies.

With federal courts having the last word on so many politically charged issues — such as health care, immigration, the environment and executive branch power — Republicans are eager to place conservative-minded judges on the bench while they are certain they can.

At the same time, Senate Republicans are also worried that a failure to get Judge Kavanaugh on the court could spur a backlash among conservative voters, leading them to stay home in November and put the Republican majority at risk from its own supporters.

Judge Kavanaugh is well versed in the power politics surrounding federal judgeships. He was part of the team in the administration of President George W. Bush who selected and worked with judicial nominees during years of intense clashes with Democrats who sought to block many candidates for the federal appeals courts.

In one of his many political comments on Thursday, Judge Kavanaugh said he had been subjected to a “good, old-fashioned attempt at Borking” — referring to the failed 1987 Supreme Court nomination of Judge Robert Bork that is seared in the minds of conservatives who believe their champion was unfairly attacked by Democrats.

Democrats said Friday that Judge Kavanaugh’s fiery rebuttal of the accusations against him gave them even greater concern that he would be an ideologue on the bench.

“His partisan screed yesterday was telling,” said Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, Democrat of Rhode Island, who sits on the Judiciary Committee.

Senator Dianne Feinstein of California, the senior Democrat on the panel, said Judge Kavanaugh had been belligerent and did not exhibit the impartiality, fairness or even-handedness typically expected in a nominee for the Supreme Court.

“Judge Kavanaugh used as much political rhetoric as my Republican colleagues, and what’s more, he went on the attack,” she said.

Republicans said he had a right to do so given what he has endured. They are not deterred by the latest delay. The door is open to a clear conservative majority on the court, and they intend to walk through it before what goes around comes around again.

