Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/27/nyregion/new-york-honoring-ruth-bader-ginsburg.html

Title: Today’s New York News: Honoring Ruth Bader Ginsburg - The New York Times

By Jonathan  Wolfe

Good morning on this nebulous Thursday.

Today, a group of elected officials, legal scholars and women’s rights advocates is beginning a campaign to honor Ruth Bader Ginsburg, a Supreme Court justice who spent her career as a lawyer fighting for women’s rights.

(Meanwhile in Washington, the Supreme Court nominee, Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh, will be defending himself against sexual misconduct allegations.)

The group wants to rename the Brooklyn Municipal Building in Downtown Brooklyn after Justice Ginsburg to recognize her accomplishments.

“She has been a clear voice for women’s rights issues and human rights issues,” said Eric Adams, the Brooklyn borough president.

And, of course, she’s also a New Yorker.

Justice Ginsburg grew up in Flatbush, Brooklyn, during the Depression. She attended James Madison High School, studied at Cornell and went on to Columbia Law School, graduating in 1959 at the top of her class. Even so, not a single New York City law firm would give her a job because she was a woman.

She later became the first woman to be a tenured professor at Columbia Law School. During the 1970s, she argued a number of women’s rights cases at the Supreme Court at a time when female lawyers before the court were rare.

She became a Supreme Court justice in 1993, the second female justice, after Sandra Day O’Connor. She’s now joined by two other New York women: Sonia Sotomayor from the Bronx and Elena Kagan from Manhattan.

And maybe you’ve noticed that Justice Ginsburg has become quite popular recently.

She has become a meme, the documentary “RBG” was a surprise hit this summer, and her life story is being made into a biographical movie this year.

We reached out to the Supreme Court for comment.

“Justice Ginsburg was made aware of the proposal to rename the municipal building in Brooklyn after her,” said Kathleen L. Arberg, a public information officer at the Supreme Court. “The justice is honored that her name was put forward.”

But we’d like to know what you think. Should we rename the Brooklyn Municipal Building after Justice Ginsburg? Let us know in the comments.

Here’s what else is happening:

We’re getting a break after last night’s thunderstorms, at least for a few hours.

The skies will clear throughout the day, the humidity will drop, and lunchtime should be pretty sunny. The high is near 71.

Soak it up. More clouds and a chance of rain roll in this evening.

• Yale Law School was boasting that if confirmed, Brett Kavanaugh would be its fourth sitting Yalie on the court. Now it is facing a moment of reckoning. [New York Times]

• In nearly every school district in the state, students are doing better on the annual math and reading exams. But how does that compare to last year? [New York Times]

• Uber, the ride-hailing app, plans to donate millions of dollars to help cities reduce congestion and emissions — an issue critics say Uber itself adds to. [New York Times]

• A racially tinged campaign attack ad released by Representative Chris Collins is drawing criticism from fellow House members. [New York Times]

• Dozens of public housing residents shared emotional testimonies in United States District Court at a hearing to decide if an independent monitor will oversee the New York City Housing Authority. [New York Times]

• With help from New York magazine, a new website is looking to fill the void of dwindling New York City news coverage as a local news outlet. [New York Times]

• Some city lawmakers and transit officials will be riding the subway next week to gather feedback on the issues that everyday riders face. [am New York]

• He was a nameless fixture on the Upper West Side until he died and was buried on Hart Island. He now has an identity. [West Side Rag]

• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Morning Briefing.

• Start your morning with a free classical music concert by the New York Philharmonic at Lincoln Center. 9:45 a.m. [Free, tickets will be handed out beginning at 9 a.m.]

• The New York Burlesque Festival hosts more than 100 performers at locations around Brooklyn. Prices and times vary.

• Browse original paintings, photographs and sculptures at the Affordable Art Fair at the Metropolitan Pavilion in Chelsea. 6 p.m. [$20]

• “The Archaeology of Beer.” Learn about the history of beer, with a tasting of old-timey beers, at the Brooklyn Brainery in Prospect Heights. 6:30 p.m. [$15]

• Performers compete for the crown at the 2018 Miss Subways Pageant, at Littlefield in Gowanus, Brooklyn. 8 p.m. [$20]

• Yankees at Rays, 1:10 p.m. (YES). Mets host Braves, 7:10 p.m. (SNY).

• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until Monday.

• For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide.

His Favorite Attractions

Dear Diary:

When I tell people about my trips to New York, many of them ask about the shows that I saw, the restaurants where I ate, the museums and exhibits that I visited.

Lately, these have not been among my expectations of what to do in the city. I travel to New York from Bethesda, Md., on a Vamoose Bus, which takes me to West 34th Street. At Penn Station, I take the L.I.R.R. to Jamaica or the E train to Queens.

On my visits, we share hugs because we won or we failed; reminisce about simpler days when we were younger and lighter; yell about the state of politics in the comfort of close family and friends; and watch the world’s diversity literally pass by on Queens Boulevard.

We sit around in our pajamas and binge watch “Avengers” movies, breaking for dinner and then watching some more. We reaffirm and develop new proofs of our TADS — teenagers are a different species — theory. We talk about a fish named Marc Anthony and guinea pigs named Merry and Pippen.

New York City: It is the people, and the pets, that bring me here.

— Sudha Sivaram

One hundred years ago, a global flu epidemic spread, infecting about one in every three people on the planet.

The influenza pandemic of 1918 was the deadliest in history, killing an estimated 50 million.

(More Americans died of the flu than were our casualties in World War I, World War II, the Korean War and the Vietnam Wars combined.)

People were warned to avoid crowds “where there is danger from sneezing, coughing and spitting” and to take care “when telephoning, so that the lips would not touch the mouthpiece of the telephone,” reported The Times.

The Museum of the City of New York is looking back on the epidemic, along with other germs and infectious diseases that spread in our city, in its exhibition “Germ City: Microbes and the Metropolis.”

Tonight, you can join a discussion, “The World’s Deadliest Pandemic: A Century Later,” which explores the global influenza pandemic and its relation to the present day. [6:30 p.m.; $15]

For the wary, a pop-up clinic will offer flu shots before the discussion.

New York Today is a morning roundup that is published weekdays at 6 a.m. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.

What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday. 

Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra S. Levine and Jonathan Wolfe, on Twitter.

You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.

