Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/18/opinion/letters/manafort.html


Title: Why Manafort Must Have Something ‘Really Good’

Subtitle: A longtime federal prosecutor offers insight into the making of a plea deal.


To the Editor:

Re “Manafort Agrees to Help Mueller as Part of Deal” (front page, Sept. 15):

To the uninitiated, Paul Manafort’s guilty plea on Friday may seem routine. A man is charged with a crime and cuts a deal to cooperate in exchange for a lower sentence.

In my 25 years as a federal prosecutor, I cut hundreds of cooperation deals. A prosecutor does not agree to recommend a lower sentence unless the defendant has something the prosecutor wants. So Mr. Manafort must hold the key to an especially shiny object in Robert Mueller’s sights.

I say “especially shiny” because Mr. Manafort’s circumstances would make most prosecutors say “no way” to Mr. Manafort’s request for a cooperation deal. 

First, few things make the hair on the back of a prosecutor’s neck stand up more quickly than when a defendant threatens or tampers with a prosecutor’s witnesses. Mr. Manafort’s early introduction to prison life came when his bond was canceled for tampering with two prosecution witnesses.

Second, Mr. Manafort pleaded guilty on the eve of his second trial. By this time, the prosecutors had already prepared their exhibits, witnesses and arguments. So offering a cooperation deal immediately before trial is a rarity, especially in a case that appears so strong it has been described as “bulletproof.”

Before federal prosecutors offer a cooperation deal, they generally interview the defendant to get a preview of what he has to offer — sort of like a coming attraction. Prosecutors are like skeptical moviegoers who do not want to buy a ticket unless they know the movie will be worth the money. A prosecutor will not offer a cooperation deal unless he knows the defendant has information that will assist in the prosecution of other criminals.

Until new indictments are released, or court filings offer a clue, or Mr. Manafort testifies at a public proceeding, we will not know the exact shape of his cooperation. But whatever Paul Manafort has offered the special counsel in exchange for his last-minute cooperation deal, it must be good. It must be really good.

Michael J. SternLos AngelesThe writer was a federal prosecutor with the Justice Department.

