Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/11/magazine/a-diagnosis-update-new-information-on-a-young-girls-rare-genetic-condition.html

Title: A Diagnosis Update: New Information on a Young Girl’s Rare Genetic Condition - The New York Times

By Lisa Sanders, M.D.

Last week I presented the case of the 6-year-old girl in South Dakota who had episodes of transient muscle weakness dozens of times a day, starting around the time she turned 1. The events seemed to be triggered by strong emotions, particularly joy. She had thorough work-ups as neurologists, first in South Dakota, then at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., tried to figure out the cause of these odd spells. Just before she turned 4, Kamiyah was accepted into the National Institutes of Health’s Undiagnosed Diseases Network — truly the diagnosticians of last resort. She spent a week in Bethesda, Md., getting test after test, as doctors there searched for disorders that could cause the symptoms she was experiencing. All that testing finally produced an answer: She had a genetic abnormality causing these attacks of muscular weakness.

The fact that Kamiyah has a diagnosis makes her different from the five previous patients I have written about in this column. For those men and women, I invited the New York Times readership to help make a diagnosis. In Kamiyah’s case, my goal is different — and the crowd’s role is different, too. As her mom, Breteni, says, knowing the name of the gene mutation is only part of the overall picture. What Breteni now wants is for the global crowd to help her fit together the rest of the puzzle, to help give her a fuller understanding of what this information means for Kamiyah and her future.

Kamiyah is not the only person to have this genetic abnormality. The medical literature has reported on 21 others with variations of the same gene. Because of the anonymity of case reports, we don’t know who those individuals are — or even where in the world they may live. Nor do we know anything about others who may have the same abnormality, whether diagnosed or not. I wrote to see if we could use the crowd to find a community for Kamiyah — others who have what she has, whom she can learn from and share with. Kamiyah’s mother once told me that it takes a village to raise any child. Her goal in telling Kamiyah’s story, and mine in writing it, is to find Kamiyah’s village.

In that first story, I didn’t include the specific gene that was affected. I wanted to give people a chance to see what Kamiyah’s spells looked like. In that way, friends and relatives of those who have similar episodes wouldn’t be caught up in the numbers and letters that identify the gene but would rely on what they observed. And that’s been useful. Dozens wrote in with stories about their own children or people they knew who had similar symptoms. Now it’s time to reach out to those who know this gene by its proper name.

Kamiyah has a mutation in the KCNMA1 gene. This is a gene that carries instructions to build a channel to let potassium in or out of a cell. This channel is found in the highest concentration in nerve tissue, mostly in the brain. Kamiyah’s version of the gene seems to cause these spells by affecting the way potassium moves in or out of the cell in a way that can transiently inhibit the brain’s normal control of the muscles of the body.

Identifying the gene and understanding what it does may someday make finding or perhaps developing a treatment easier. But what it will do right now is to help Kamiyah find her village and to give others who recognize themselves or their children in Kamiyah a clue that might help identify the cause of their spells. So if what happens to Kamiyah looks familiar to you, or if you actually know this gene, let us know. Let’s share this universe of personal knowledge to make at least one child’s life better. And to give all those affected by this mutation a village of their own.

