Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/movies/asia-argento-jimmy-bennett-italy.html

Title: Asia Argento’s Accuser Went on Italian TV. He Was Met With Skepticism. - The New York Times

By Sopan Deb

Jimmy Bennett, the young actor who accused the actress and prominent #MeToo advocate Asia Argento of sexually assaulting him when he was 17, gave his first public interview about the matter on Sunday, and it was a challenging one.

Mr. Bennett, 22, appeared on an Italian television show, “Non è l’Arena,” (“Outside the Arena”), where the host, Massimo Giletti, questioned the idea of how a man could be raped by a woman.

The New York Times reported last month about Mr. Bennett’s accusation against Ms. Argento, an Italian actress and director, and a $380,000 settlement struck between the two. On Sunday, Mr. Bennett described a 2013 encounter in a hotel room in Marina del Rey, Calif., where he says the assault took place.

He said that Ms. Argento, who was 37 at the time, had invited him over for what he thought was a discussion about an Italian movie that she wanted him to participate in. They had previously acted together in a movie.

Mr. Bennett said Ms. Argento gave him champagne and then started kissing him. At first, Mr. Bennett said, he thought the encounter was a result of cultural differences until the initial kissing became longer.

“I felt that it wasn’t a friendly thing anymore,” Mr. Bennett said on the show. “It’s hard for me to talk about this in front of strangers.”

Mr. Bennett said Ms. Argento pushed him on the bed, took his pants off, and then raped him.

At one point in the interview, which lasted more than an hour, Mr. Giletti asked Mr. Bennett if the intercourse was “complete.” Mr. Giletti was asking whether he had ejaculated, but Mr. Bennett, who used an interpreter, did not initially understand the question. When it was explained through his headset, he answered, “Yes.”

Mr. Giletti expressed skepticism that it was possible for a man to be sexually assaulted by a woman.

“A woman’s violence against a man or a boy is technically difficult to understand,” Mr. Giletti said. “Do you understand what I mean? A man has to take an active role, even if he is subjected to it.”

Mr. Bennett said he had heard similar thoughts expressed before. “The comments I have received were all like, ‘Why wouldn’t you want to have sex with that person? What’s wrong with you?’” he said. “But that’s not really what it’s about. A woman can be attractive in some ways, and still abuse a man.”

(One recent study found that while female sexual attacks on men were far less frequent than male attacks on women, when they did occur, men often felt social pressure to remain quiet because of preconceptions about masculinity and sex.)

Mr. Giletti also questioned Mr. Bennett about a recently published photograph of Ms. Argento and Mr. Bennett, shirtless, with their arms entwined, in a bed, taken after the 2013 encounter. Mr. Bennett said the photograph was taken with his phone. Mr. Giletti asked him why he didn’t seem upset in the photo. The audience applauded Mr. Giletti.

Gordon K. Sattro, Mr. Bennett’s attorney, who also appeared on the show, said: “If those people there were not Asia and Jimmy, but Jen and Mike, would the audience still have applauded? Understanding what was going on in his heart and in his mind, based on that picture, I think it’s wrong.”

Speaking after the interview from a cab in Rome where he and Mr. Bennett were trying to avoid a rush of paparazzi, Mr. Sattro characterized the interview as a success.

“It was really challenging but it was better than to have a softball interview,” he said. “I don’t see it as a bad thing. People are going to have to judge him for themselves. Jimmy thought, ‘I wanted to say my piece.’”

After the initial Times article, Ms. Argento denied Mr. Bennett’s account, saying in a statement, “I have never had any sexual relationship with Bennett.” She said that her boyfriend, Anthony Bourdain, the television personality who killed himself in June, had put up money for the settlement.

She later accused Mr. Bennett of being the aggressor, and on Monday, her lawyer, Mark Jay Heller said: “It was Asia that was attacked by Jimmy Bennett. Jimmy Bennett was the perpetrator and Asia Argento was the victim.”

Mr. Bennett’s accusation has led to a falling-out between Ms. Argento and Rose McGowan, who have both accused Harvey Weinstein of sexual assault. Ms. McGowan’s partner, the model Rain Dove, who also had been a friend of Ms. Argento, gave text messages to the authorities that the model said were from Ms. Argento. The author of the messages wrote that she had had sex with Mr. Bennett, but that she did not know he was a minor at the time, and suggested that Mr. Bennett was the aggressor.

The age of consent in California is 18. The Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department is investigating, but Ms. Argento has not been charged with a crime.

Ms. Argento has not paid the entire settlement; the next installment is due in October. In a statement through her attorney this month, Ms. Argento said she “will not permit any portion of the balance” to be transferred to Mr. Bennett.

Mr. Bennett’s lawyer, Mr. Sattro, said he is considering legal action to collect the balance, and that ultimately Mr. Bennett wants the money to be donated “to the #MeToo movement.”

