Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/arts/young-thug-john-oliver-pop-culture-news.html

Title: Celine Dion Leaving Las Vegas: Your Monday Pop Culture Cheat Sheet - The New York Times

By Eleanor Stanford

Welcome to your daily breakdown of the movie, TV and pop music news you should know about, curated from The New York Times and across the web. Today, stories about Celine Dion, the actor who played Apone in “Aliens,” and one great album to listen to on your commute.

Let us know what you would like to see in these roundups by emailing us at popculture@nytimes.com. Tell us the good, the bad and the silly.

A yearslong saga is about to come to an end: Bill Cosby arrived in court Monday for sentencing after his conviction in April for drugging and sexually assaulting Andrea Constand. A psychologist testified that Cosby had a personality disorder evident in his lifetime of interest in having sex with nonconsenting women. You can read about what to expect and follow our updates here.

There were moments of gold and there were flashes of light, but after eight years and more than 1,000 shows, Celine Dion will end her Las Vegas residency at the Colosseum at Caesar’s Palace next June. [ET]

The rapper Young Thug’s new EP, “On the Rvn,” is out and yes, it includes that remix of “Rocket Man” by Elton John that everyone has been talking about. That track is “High,” and there are five others to dig into. Listen on Spotify, Apple Music and other major streaming services.

Two major figures of the 1960s, Joan Baez and Paul Simon, brought their farewell tours to New York this weekend. Our critic Jon Pareles took the opportunity to ponder what pop farewells mean, whether they are “serene and modest” like Baez’s concert or a larger-scale dance party like Simon’s. [NY Times]

On “Insecure” on Sunday, Issa spun out about potentially being ghosted, and it got very awkward. But did she do enough to win this week’s bad decision index? Aisha Harris breaks it down. [NY Times]

John Oliver discussed the dangers of Facebook’s early motto “move fast and break things” on Sunday’s “Last Week Tonight.” He spliced thoughtful analysis of how the platform has inflamed tensions in Myanmar with discussions of sexy Care Bears, as is his way.

“The House With a Clock in Its Walls” dominated at the box office this weekend. Amazon’s “Life Itself,” meanwhile, flopped into 11th place. Its creator, Dan Fogelman (who is also behind the TV show “This Is Us”), had blamed the movie’s poor reviews on “white male critics who don’t like anything that has any emotion.”

... One of our latest “Internetting with Amanda Hess” videos, this time from Shane O’Neill on whether drag culture can survive its current popularity on TV and online. What happens when an art form created by a marginalized community goes mainstream? (And watch three more new “Internetting” videos here.)

Christine and the Queens’ new album “Chris” has choruses that stuck in my head all weekend and some funky basslines. “The first album was about a young, queer girl who was a bit melancholic, but now I’m flexing my muscles,”  she told The Times’s Reggie Ugwu.

New fall shows “Magnum P.I.” and “Manifest” failed to impress our critics, but James Poniewozik loved Netflix’s new series starring Jonah Hill and Emma Stone. “‘Maniac’ is about an experimental psychoactive drug. Also, it sort of is an experimental psychoactive drug,” he writes. Stream it on Netflix.

Wacky, philosophical comedy “The Good Place” returns for Season 3 on Thursday, so now is a great time to catch up on the excellent first two seasons, which are available on Netflix.

“A day in the Marine Corps is like a day on the farm — every meal’s a banquet, every paycheck a fortune, every formation a parade.”

The actor Al Matthews, who played the cigar-loving Apone in James Cameron’s “Aliens,” died Saturday at 75. Look into his eyes. [The Hollywood Reporter]

