Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/21/sports/jacob-degroms-quality-start-breaks-a-major-league-record.html

Title: Jacob deGrom’s Quality Start Breaks a Major League Record - The New York Times

By The Associated Press

WASHINGTON — Jacob deGrom turned in a record 23rd consecutive quality start, lowered his E.R.A. to 1.77 and improved his record to .500 as he contends for the National League Cy Young Award, allowing one run in seven innings to help the Mets beat the Washington Nationals, 4-2, Friday night.

Throwing fastballs in the 97- to 99-mile-per-hour range, deGrom (9-9) struck out eight batters and walked one while allowing just one run and three hits, all singles. Bob Gibson (in 1968) and Chris Carpenter (2005) each had single-season runs of 22 quality starts, the previous major league mark.

The right-handed deGrom has given up as many as four earned runs in only one of his 31 starts in 2018, on April 10 against Miami. He is now up to 28 in a row in which he has allowed three runs or fewer, the longest single-season streak in major league history.

This game was pretty much wrapped up by the third inning, which ended with the Mets ahead 4-1. Jay Bruce had two run-scoring hits, and Devin Mesoraco and Dominic Smith also delivered R.B.I., all off Joe Ross (0-1).

Robert Gsellman worked around Anthony Rendon’s run-scoring single in the ninth for his 12th save.

Washington began the day in danger of being officially eliminated from contention in the N.L. East, which it won the past two seasons under its former manager, Dusty Baker. A loss by the Nationals plus a victory by the Braves would end any chance Washington has of catching Atlanta.

DeGrom is locked in what is considered a tight race for Cy Young honors — and perhaps for consideration as the league’s most valuable player, too — with the Nationals ace Max Scherzer, who is 17-7 with a 2.57 E.R.A. and 290 strikeouts. Scherzer has won the past two Cy Young Awards in the N.L., plus one in the American League when he played for the Detroit Tigers.

In the Mets’ 5-4 victory in 12 innings on Thursday, Scherzer gave up three runs in seven innings and struck out 13.

Entering Friday, deGrom had a majors-leading 1.78 E.R.A., 251 strikeouts and 45 walks and ranked No. 1 in various other categories.

“I think that it says a lot about who he is as a worker,” Mets Manager Mickey Callaway said. “I think it says a lot about who he is as a competitor. He tends to step it up when it matters the most, and this is probably mattering the most out of all his starts, and he continues to pitch just as dominant as he was before. That’s the definition of a true ace.”

DeGrom looked good from the outset, striking out the leadoff hitter, Victor Robles, with a 98-m.p.h. fastball and then getting Bryce Harper to swing through a 99-m.p.h. pitch to end the first inning. Harper missed a 93-m.p.h. slider and struck out again in the fourth and then grounded out on a chopper fielded by deGrom in the sixth.

Washington’s only run off deGrom came on Ryan Zimmerman’s sacrifice fly on a ball hit to the warning track in deep center field in the second.

