Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/18/dining/nyc-restaurant-news.html

Title: La Vara Chefs Open Saint Julivert Fisherie in Cobble Hill, Brooklyn - The New York Times

By Florence Fabricant

For their latest project, Saint Julivert Fisherie, Alex Raij and her husband, Eder Montero, the chefs who own La Vara, El Quinto Pino and Txikito, zeroed in on seafood. “I always wanted to draw attention to fish,” Ms. Raij said. “I like cooking fish, and I also wanted to take it out of the Spanish vernacular.” So the menu they devised features global touches in dishes like raw scallops with shiso tacos, sea urchin with a sweet-corn chawanmushi custard, shellfish pozole, and a tuna casserole with curry leaf. But Spain is not ignored either, with Txikito-style octopus carpaccio and skate with sherry, chili and parsley. The long, narrow space, formerly their Texoá coffee bar, has been done in 1930s Modernist style. A central bar, lit by a complex hanging fixture by the local artist David Weeks, is its focus. “I was inspired by the Maison de Verre in Paris,” Ms. Raij said, referring to a landmark building on the Left Bank. “I didn’t want anything blue and nautical-looking.” Glass brick and hard-edged metal are also used. The restaurant seats about 40. (Opens Thursday) 

264 Clinton Street (Verandah Place), Cobble Hill, Brooklyn, 347-984-3710, SaintJulivertBK.com.

A new restaurant from Nicola Marzovilla, next to his long-running I Trulli, is an ode to the wild boar (cinghiale), Tuscan style. The space has a rustic farmhouse look with a wood-burning oven and an open kitchen. The chef, Ben Smallman, plans specialties like pappardelle with wild boar ragù, gnocchi with rabbit liver and sage, other game dishes and assorted cured meats.

122 East 27th Street, 646-610-9695. 

An open, welcoming entrance with a bar and tables introduces this London import’s space. Breakfast is served in the front area and at some tables just past it, giving way to all-day fare like coronation curried chicken salad, fish and chips, a Maine lobster roll and tuna poke. In the evening, the space is a wine bar. Another stretch of white marble bar is just past this area, at the curving entrance to the spacious main dining room overlooking Columbus Circle and Central Park. There are a total of 220 seats in the restaurant, with menus by the French chef Nicolas Houlbert, who worked in New York at Daniel Boulud’s restaurants. The main dining room offers tempura shrimp, oysters, steak tartare, grilled lobster, beef Wellington, a cheese soufflé and spiced chicken for two with bread sauce. 

Time Warner Center, 10 Columbus Circle, Third Floor, (347) 682-2100, bluebirdlondon.nyc.

The design-driven store based in Milan, with branches in Shanghai; Seoul, South Korea; and Beijing, has opened in New York. In addition to clothing, accessories, books, art objects, cosmetics and a gallery, each of the stores also has a restaurant. In New York, it’s an upbeat, glittery affair with tabletops covered in Pollocky scrawls, comfortable leather banquettes and classically rendered Northern Italian food prepared by Jordan Frosolone and Danilo Galati. 

1 Fulton Street (Front Street), Seaport District, 212-265-9500, 10corsocomo.nyc.

The relocation of Einat Admony’s flagship, from NoLIta into the former Bar Bolonat space in the West Village, will be complete this week. Balaboosta will again serve the chef’s personal brand of Israeli-Mediterranean food but with a new, refreshed menu. (Thursday) 

611 Hudson Street (West 12th Street), 212-390-1545.

No bigger than a Pullman kitchen, this new spot with counter seating serves 13- and 15-course kaiseki tasting menus, $138 and $178, by the chef and owner Xiaowei Zheng, formerly of Sushi Dojo. 

954 Manhattan Avenue (India Street), Greenpoint, Brooklyn, 917-909-0580, chikonyc.com.

Beneath the new Shake Shack in the West Village, there’s a culinary laboratory that will be used to develop new menu items, especially burgers, often in collaboration with chefs like Daniel Humm, Daniel Boulud and, from London, Fergus Henderson. The new dishes will first be served in the Shake Shack on the ground floor. Customer feedback will determine whether the experimental burgers, shakes and other items will be offered more widely. 

225 Varick Street (Clarkson Street), shakeshack.com. 

Ricky Liang, who owns Congee Village in Chinatown and Flushing, Queens, has teamed up with one of the owners of Zhen Wei Fang in Miami, to open this spacious hot-pot restaurant. It replaces a Cantonese hot-pot restaurant Mr. Liang previously ran in the space. On the menu are high-end ingredients like Wagyu beef and, in addition to tabletop hot-pot cooking, such specialties as Peking duck. The restaurant runs virtual-reality projections on the tabletops and has areas for karaoke. 

207 Bowery, 646-767-0355, zhenweinyc.com.

There’s counter service for thin-crust pizzas at this sibling to the Southern Italian comfort food nook, Sauce, on the Lower East Side. And true to its name, it provides extra sauce for dipping and enjoying remnants of pizza crust — a growing national preoccupation. (Saturday) 

345 East 12th Street (First Avenue), 646-983-4007.

This new location for the Garret chain of bars owned by Den Hospitality seeks to channel Hemingway, with rums, tequilas and other spirits from Mexico south through the Caribbean and Latin America. Vintage decorative details and Cuban art enhance the setting. Tapas-style snacks are served. (Thursday) 

349 Broome Street (Elizabeth Street), thegarretnolita.com.

Mr. Bull, who worked at Jones Wood Foundry on the Upper East Side from 2014 to 2016, is back at the pub, now as executive chef. His mandate, from the owner Jason Hicks, is to broaden the menu. In addition to the English classics for which Jones Wood Foundry is known, there will also be a seasonal menu featuring local items. 

The well-established Belgian chef and restaurateur, an early proponent of farm-to-table cooking and a close friend of Charles Masson, the manager of Majorelle on the Upper East Side, has now become the consulting chef for that restaurant. Mr. Souvereyns has added several dishes to the menu, including curried langoustines with apple, and duck breast with rosemary, Calvados and apple. 

Ms. Tong, the owner of Little Tong Noodle Shop, which opened in the East Village last year and quickly became known for its Yunnan-style mixian noodle dishes, has plans for a new Chinese restaurant in the West Village. She has not yet decided on the menu for the intimate space with a garden. 

20 Cornelia Street.

More tenants and details for this food-focused West Side development have been revealed. Citarella, the upscale New York-based grocery chain, will open Citarella Hudson Yards. The new grocery will fill 10,500 square feet on the second floor of the central building, where most of the shops and restaurants will be clustered. It will have a raw bar and expand its cooked seafood options. Belcampo, an Oakland, Calif., restaurant that has its own organic farm, will open its first outpost outside that state, on the fourth floor of the building. Michael Lomonaco, the chef and restaurateur who signed on to the project in its early stages, will call his fourth-floor brasserie-style restaurant Hudson Yards Grill. And Eunjo Park, who has worked at top places like Daniel and Momofuku Ko, has been named the executive chef of the Momofuku restaurant to open in the same retail and restaurant building. 

