Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/13/magazine/letter-of-recommendation-murphy-beds.html

Title: Letter of Recommendation: Murphy Beds - The New York Times

By Jody Rosen

A Murphy bed can kill you. In June 1904, wire services picked up the story of Mrs. A.M. Woodward of Minneapolis, whose foldaway bed lurched up and slammed shut in the middle of the night. The woman’s husband, who was sleeping beside her, “got one arm out of the bed and beat on the floor until help came.” But for Mrs. Woodward, it was too late: Three cervical vertebrae in her neck were crushed, and she died hours later on a surgeon’s table.

It was not the only such incident in the early years of the century. Every few months, another macabre headline would hit the newspapers (“Groans: They Bring Attention to Man Killed in Folding Bed”). It was hardly an epidemic; statistically speaking, you were probably as likely to die by tripping over an ottoman or walking under a falling piano. But there were enough of these mishaps to seize the imagination, fixing in popular consciousness the image of a bed that could snap you up in its jaws as you slept, a dark Freudian joke that silent-movie comedians turned into a staple of slapstick farce. The most famous sequence is in Charlie Chaplin’s “One A.M.” from 1916, a five-minute wrestling match between man and bed that ends with both competitors half destroyed and what’s left of Chaplin staggering away to sleep in the bathtub.

Murphy-bed technology has improved over the last century-plus. In any case, when my wife and I made the decision to get one, the question of life and limb never entered the calculus. We had a more pressing concern: square footage. She’s an artist; she needs room to spread out when she works. In our Brooklyn apartment, space is tight, crammed with our belongings and the debris that seems to scatter behind our two children whenever they move. Even when the place is at its tidiest, there is a good deal of flattening your body against walls to let family members pass.

The Murphy bed offered a solution. Each morning, we wake up, pile pillows and blankets in the corner and push the bed up, where it slips into an upright frame so discreet that your eye slides right over it. Presto: The bedroom is transformed into a work space. At night, the contraption is flipped down again, the linen goes back on and we take advantage of a minor engineering marvel — sacking out on a queen-size mattress that sits not on a bed, per se, but on a cantilever measuring 87.5 inches by 65.5 inches, a wall temporarily gone horizontal.

The 21st century is a golden age of convertible furniture and space-saving hacks: modular couches, bookshelves that collapse into dining tables, “tiny houses” whose every centimeter is exploited and optimized. The Murphy bed was the ur-hack. It was, in the words of one encyclopedia of inventions, “pioneering in the field of motion furniture,” the spiritual progenitor of sleeper sofas and La-Z-Boy recliners. The first mass-produced retractable beds date to the late 19th century. Sometime around 1900, William L. Murphy, a San Francisco entrepreneur, established the Murphy Wall Bed Company, a brand name that became a generic name. In the 1920s and ’30s, Murphy beds proliferated, in a variety of models and designs — beds that folded up on hinges or rotated back on pivots, beds that were concealed behind cabinets or sprang out of closets. The name William Murphy gave to the device in his original patent carried a whiff of magic: “Disappearing Bed.”

There was a time when Murphy beds signified a kind of deviance. They were associated with noir midcentury urban life, with fleabag hotels and S.R.O.s, with single men leading marginal, vaguely seedy lives. Think of Edward Hopper’s “Nighthawks”: Surely that loner at the diner counter shuffled home to sleep, and smoke, on his foldaway bed. In 2018, though, the Murphy bed has been gentrified. Today’s versions are designed for respectable marital homes and have price points to match. For a couple thousand bucks, you get more than a good piece of furniture. You get a nostalgia trip: a reminder, in an era dominated by alienating interactions with digital devices, of the tactile satisfactions of Machine Age technology. My bed has an ingenious system of pivots and pistons; it swings open with easy grace and claps closed with a pleasing thud. Even if I didn’t need to take the bed out and stow it away every day, I might do so anyway, for kicks.

What’s more: Murphy beds are sexy. According to legend, Murphy invented his disappearing bed so he could receive a female visitor in his studio flat without scandalizing the neighbors. Today our moral code is more permissive, but the Murphy bed still carries an erotic charge. A regular old bed just sits there, inert, banal, a little sad. But a Murphy bed pops out of the wall — boing! — like the punch line to a dirty joke. It is an instant boudoir. You pull down your Murphy bed and a saucy question seems to hang in the air: Now what?

Of course, for the space-starved apartment dweller, hemmed in by low ceilings and swarming children, some things are sexier than sex. The real frisson comes when you move the Murphy bed in the other direction, tucking away the retractable legs, shoving it up into its frame. I’ve repeated this routine every day for years, and the result never fails to produce a spasm of shock and delight. There, suddenly, improbably, is an expanse of bare floor that may measure only 100 square feet but seems somehow far larger. It’s a magic trick indeed: Abracadabra, an empty room.

