Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/23/sports/baseball/mlb-playoff-races.html

Title: M.L.B. Playoff Races: Brewers and Cardinals Roll Toward a Showdown - The New York Times

By The Associated Press

The Milwaukee Brewers and the St. Louis Cardinals have been battling each other from afar for potential home advantage in the National League wild-card game on Oct. 2. Now they will go head to head for three games in St. Louis starting on Monday. Each team won handily on Sunday.

In the American League wild-card race, the Yankees and the Oakland Athletics each missed opportunities to gain ground. Here is where the various competitive playoff races stand: 

Sunday’s scores 

The Brewers have a two-game lead over the Cardinals for the top position, while the Cardinals have a one-and-a-half-game lead over the Colorado Rockies for the second spot. 

The visiting Brewers held their position, getting home runs from Christian Yelich, his 32nd, and Travis Shaw, his 31st, in a 13-6 victory over the mistake-prone Pittsburgh Pirates. Milwaukee scored five runs in the sixth inning, with the ball leaving the infield only once. 

The Cardinals won their third game in a row and sixth of seven in a 9-2 home win against San Francisco. Matt Carpenter hit his N.L.-leading 36th home run for St. Louis.

The Rockies kept pace with a 2-0 win at the Arizona Diamondbacks. Kyle Freeland led the way, giving up seven hits and striking out six in seven innings. Colorado will finish at home against the Phillies and the Nationals, both N.L. East also-rans.

The Chicago Cubs lead the Brewers by two and a half games. 

Kyle Schwarber homered and drove in two runs, and the Cubs beat the rival White Sox 6-1 to lower their magic number for clinching the division title to five. It was Schwarber’s first homer against a left-hander this season and his 26th over all. The Cubs will host the Pirates in a four-game series starting Monday.

The Los Angeles Dodgers lead the Rockies by one and a half games. 

The Dodgers made a strong statement, defeating the visiting San Diego Padres, 14-0. Hyun-Jin Ryu struck out eight and gave up four hits in six innings. Los Angeles will play their next three games at Arizona.

The Yankees, who have clinched a berth, lead the Oakland Athletics by one and a half games for the top position and home field for the wild-card game Oct. 3. 

The Yankees left an opening for the Athletics, blowing a 3-0 first-inning lead and losing by 6-3 to the lowly Baltimore Orioles, who were fueled by two home runs from Tim Beckham. Oakland, however, failed to take advantage, losing by 5-1 at home to Minnesota. The A’s have six road games coming up, including three at Seattle starting Monday.

The Yankees, who will play their next seven games on the road, including four at Tampa Bay, will have the ace Luis Severino (18-8) on the mound on Monday night. They will almost certainly not face the Rays’ ace, Blake Snell, who improved to 21-5 on Sunday.

The Houston Astros lead the Athletics by four and a half games.

The Astros solidified their hold on first place with a 6-2 victory at home against the Los Angeles Angels. Houston, however, is now facing a pitching question, as Charlie Morton left after one inning because of recurring discomfort in his pitching shoulder. Houston will end its regular season with series at Toronto and Baltimore.

 

