Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/23/sports/mets-salvage-their-final-trip-with-a-soggy-victory.html

Title: Mets Salvage Their Final Trip With a Soggy Victory - The New York Times

By The Associated Press

WASHINGTON — At the end of a long, cold, wet afternoon, the Mets managed a split of their final trip of the season.

Michael Conforto hit a go-ahead, bases-loaded triple, the rookie Jeff McNeil matched a career high with four hits, and the Mets beat the Washington Nationals, 8-6, on Sunday.

The first pitch was delayed 25 minutes, and rain continued during the game, which lasted 4 hours 14 minutes — the longest nine-inning contest this season for both teams. Washington’s grounds crew tended to the infield between innings throughout the day.

The Mets finished their road schedule at 40-41, better than their 33-42 mark at home, where they have six games left. The Mets took three of four from the Nationals in the teams’ final series of the season, and went 5-5 on its trip to Boston, Philadelphia and Washington.

“It was nice to come in here and be able to do what we did to kind of even up the road trip,” Manager Mickey Callaway said. “We played some good teams on the road trip, and I think our guys have done a good job of continuing to fight all year, whether it’s the season or a road trip, or whatever. You don’t always see that, so I’m really proud of that from them.”

Washington, which fell to .500 (78-78) a day after it was eliminated from playoff contention, scored three runs in the eighth and got the tying man into scoring position with two outs before Juan Soto fouled out.

“Today was a tough game to mentally get in, get ready to play with the rain, the delay,” shortstop Trea Turner said. “It’s pretty cold for the first time in a long time. Wasn’t fun conditions, but I felt like we battled.”

The Nationals led by 3-1 before the Mets rallied in the fourth. Wander Suero (3-1) entered with one out and two on and allowed a walk before McNeil singled in a run.

Conforto then poked a shot to left-center past a diving Michael A. Taylor to clear the bases and make the score 5-3. Suero surrendered two more runs in the fifth when Kevin Plawecki delivered an R.B.I. double and scored on an infield single by Amed Rosario.

Drew Gagnon (2-1) pitched two scoreless innings for the Mets. Anthony Swarzak recorded the final five outs for his fourth save in five tries.

Mets starter Steven Matz allowed three runs in three innings. Washington’s Erick Fedde surrendered three runs in three and a third innings.

McNeil improved his batting average to .328 in 195 at-bats since his big league debut on July 24.

“It’s awesome to come up here and have instant success,” McNeil said. “I’m going to try to finish strong.”

The rookie Victor Robles homered, tripled and drove in three runs for Washington.

Extra Bases

Mickey Callaway said the team still planned to activate third baseman David Wright from the disabled list before Tuesday’s game against Atlanta. Wright, who has not played for the Mets since May 2016 because of neck, back and shoulder injuries, is scheduled to start on Saturday against Miami in what will probably be his final appearance in the big leagues. However, he could also make an earlier appearance. “I wouldn’t mind getting him in there and getting him a pinch-hit at-bat when it makes sense in the Braves series,” Callaway said. … Trea Turner stole second base in the third to set the Nationals’ career record with 123. The previous steals leader since the club moved to Washington in 2005 was Ian Desmond, with 122 from 2009 to 2015. Turner’s 42 steals this season lead the majors.

