Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/22/sports/baseball/mets-nationals.html

Title: Nationals Defeat Mets but Lose Postseason Hopes - The New York Times

By The Associated Press

WASHINGTON — The rookie Austin Voth and four relievers combined on a one-hitter, and Washington defeated the Mets, 6-0, on Saturday, hours after the Nationals had been eliminated from playoff contention.

Matt Wieters and Trea Turner homered for Washington.

Voth (1-1), making his second major league start, allowed only an infield single to Michael Conforto, leading off the fourth inning. Voth struck out five, with two walks, in five innings.

The Nationals’ loss Friday night, coupled with the Atlanta Braves’ win, knocked Washington out of the National League East race. Then, shortly after Saturday’s game began, the St. Louis Cardinals beat the San Francisco Giants on a 10th-inning homer, ending Washington’s wild-card hopes.

Favored to win a third straight division title, the Nationals slid into third place on June 22 and remained there.

“One day, it could have been the pitching,” Washington’s first-year manager, Dave Martinez, said before the game. “One day, it could have been we didn’t get one extra hit. Multiple reasons.”

He added, “You learn from it and move on and try to figure out how to make those days better, those things better.”

The team’s owners stood pat at the July trade deadline, and the team went on to win six of seven games. But after a four-game losing streak, the Nationals were nine games out of first place in mid-August, and the team unloaded Daniel Murphy and Matt Adams, among other players.

The team had setbacks with injuries to pitchers Stephen Strasburg and Sean Doolittle, as well as to Adam Eaton, Murphy and Ryan Zimmerman. But even when healthy, Washington was unable to put together an extended winning stretch.

Even with Saturday’s win, the Nationals will lose the season series to the fourth-place Mets.

Turner’s 18th home run of the season, a two-run shot, put Washington ahead in the third, and Wieters added a three-run homer off reliever Jerry Blevins in the sixth.

The Mets’ Corey Oswalt (3-3) allowed two runs over five innings.

Matt Grace, Justin Miller, Jimmy Cordero and Austen Williams each worked an inning for Washington in relief of Voth.

Bryce Harper drew his 125th walk of the season, a career high and a Nationals record.

Washington’s Anthony Rendon extended his on-base streak to 30 games with a sixth-inning double, and Turner extended his on-base streak to 22 games with a first-inning double.

Inside Pitch

Mets second baseman Jeff McNeil was given the day off. … The left-hander Steven Matz (5-11, 4.18 earned run average) will make his sixth start of the season against the Nationals on Sunday.

