Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/21/books/review/brother-david-chariandy-empire-of-light-michael-bible-diet-of-worms-erik-rasmussen.html

Title: New Fiction Traces the Anguish of Lost Young Men - The New York Times

By Patrick Abatiell

EMPIRE OF LIGHT By Michael Bible 97 pp. Melville House. Paper, $15.99.

 “Empire of Light” is about the wish to drop out of life when the world as it is fails to satisfy or sustain. The novella’s young narrator is Maloney, a foster child living in an abusive home in North Carolina. He befriends Miles, a quarterback and a rich kid, and Molly, the daughter of a pill-popping English teacher, and together they play hooky from the disaster of everyday life, finding refuge in a trailer that belongs to their school’s custodian.

Life at the trailer is something of a low-grade bacchanal. Like regular life, it seems neither particularly pleasing nor especially sustainable — yet the three fight to prolong it. In some sense, this is a narrative of depression; its characters all share a desire for a release they can’t quite name. “We snorted painkillers off the yearbook,” Maloney recalls, “shot bottle rockets off the roof and longed for a giant storm to wash us away.”

At the same time, Bible roots out the sublime pleasures available at the searing edge of depressed feeling. Denis Johnson seems to be the abiding spirit of the novel, which achieves the incendiary strangeness of his prose if not the same supreme illumination. Johnson’s genius was to locate the fearful and the luminous within the contours of the quotidian. Bible doesn’t fully achieve this; rather, he appends the mystical registers of experience to his main narrative by way of a fantasy subplot that clings only loosely to the rest of the book.

The choice seems both odd and unnecessary, since Bible is at times quite adept at bringing out the strange fire at the heart of everyday life. Teenage desire itself has a mystical quality. Miles’s body in particular takes on an almost talismanic power, and Bible is careful in his attention to its postures, strength and states of dress and undress. At a glance Maloney notes that “the light from the autumn sun was making him radiate.” Bible offers us a remarkable vision of adolescence as not just a time of extreme exposure but one of visionary longing.

BROTHER By David Chariandy 177 pp. Bloomsbury. $22.

Toward the end of “Brother,” Francis, the title character, reflects on the circumstances of his community in a housing complex outside of Toronto and, in a moment of supreme disappointment, laments, “There’s no way forward.” It is an eerie, abject cry that gets to the heart of Chariandy’s motivating theme: the agony of frustrated progress as both an individual and social problem.

The novel begins 10 years after Francis’ violent death at the hands of the police, and finds his brother, Michael, their mother and their old friends caught in a cycle of grief. Their mother is especially afflicted — “unable to mourn,” as Michael explains: “She’s stuck.” Freud termed this sort of interminable bereavement “melancholia.” If these characters are stuck in this anguished state, it is largely because they already live in a world of crippling stasis. Their community is wildly overpoliced, riven by crime and structured according to racist conventions that reproduce poverty from one generation to the next.

The challenge for a novel set in a place where nothing ever changes is how to find room for a narrative to move ahead. Chariandy handles this skillfully, by traveling at once inward, into the intimate lives of his characters, and outward, connecting the diasporic community to a wider world of postcolonial migration. This is a tall order for so slender a book, and with such robust material one wishes the novel were more substantial — that it reached just a bit deeper or farther. It seems limited by a rush toward its climax, which depicts the moment of violence that operates as the novel’s traumatic core.

The novel is at its most rhapsodic in moments of pastoral seclusion, as Michael and Francis walk, and spot fish, and “hunt for the other small lives that had managed to survive” in a park that runs through their urban landscape. The poignancy of these passages mirrors that of later scenes in which Francis gradually finds community in a neighborhood barbershop. There may be no clear path forward, but amid the melancholy Chariandy suggests it may be possible to endure, and even to thrive.

A DIET OF WORMS By Erik Rasmussen 245 pp. Mastodon. Paper, $18.

For a brief, bleak period in the early 2000s, it was acceptable for straight men to punctuate gestures of perceived male-male intimacy with the assertion “no homo.” Rasmussen revives that unfortunate spirit in his debut novel, “A Diet of Worms.” Narrated by Larry, the 17-year-old son of a dying, abusive fireman, the novel sketches out a version of working-class Long Island that is brutal and bereft of kindness, a sort of social wreckage. Violence is everywhere. Wild dogs roam the streets.

But the novel errs in relying on Larry’s vitriol as its only source of energy. His contempt is so one-note and all-encompassing that it produces a measure of narrative leveling. Scenes of outrage pile up without a sense of purpose, and on the whole the novel reads as relentless and merely spiteful. It is not simply about adolescence; it is itself adolescent in its willingness to indulge in sheer rage unalloyed with nuanced thought.

This may be in part an issue of form. The first-person narration is so constricted as to choke out any possibility for reflection, irony or insight. The meagerness of Larry’s inner world becomes the novel’s own, and readers are offered a banquet of crass judgment and dubious wisdom. Larry’s notion that “things happen and it’s not always your decision” offers neither a complex theory of ethics nor a very sophisticated approach to narrative. On the whole, the narrator suffers from a breed of Holden Caulfield syndrome — fueled by the libidinal charge of anger and indignation — but his author lacks Salinger’s grace and control.

This means Rasmussen fails to follow through on his most interesting provocation: Is tenderness possible in a brutal world? This question forces itself through the rubble occasionally, as in early scenes when Larry and a male friend masturbate together. But these homoerotic moments are leeched of both thought and eros. The novel is instead so in thrall to heterosexual desire that it literally climaxes with Larry and a young girl having sex. Simultaneous orgasm has never been less satisfying.

“A Diet of Worms” seems stuck between two irreconcilable mandates. One is toward a kind of blunt, unmediated realism, an urge to collect incidents and “explain them plain.” The result is a realistic depiction of a broken world. The other is best summed up by Larry himself: “Looking real doesn’t make it good.”

