Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/nyregion/new-york-today-behind-a-police-department-scandal.html

Title: New York Today: Behind a Police Department Scandal - The New York Times

By Amy Zerba

Good morning on this fresh fall Monday.

It is one of the worst scandals to rock the New York Police Department in years: A retired police detective was arrested and accused of running a prostitution and gambling ring that brought in millions of dollars across the city. It was a business in which the ring leader relied on a group of police officers to protect the enterprise and foil any planned raids, according to the police.

A team of Times reporters spent a week piecing together the rise and fall of Ludwig Paz, the former detective whose years of wearing a badge in Brooklyn, the police said, would be on-the-job training for a second career running a ring of prostitutes and pimps.

[Read our complete coverage of Mr. Paz here.]

We sat down with Michael Wilson, one of those reporters, to learn more about brothels, raids and what we still don’t know about the case.

How prevalent are brothels in New York today?

Brothels per se are still around, but they’re more pop-up now. An ad online could invite visitors to a specific motel room for just that one night — that was happening recently in the Bronx. Long-term addresses involving prostitution seem to have declined, as have prostitution arrests. It’s still a problem in parts of Brooklyn and Queens.

 What exactly does a vice squad do, and do the officers have specialized training?

The vice squad focuses on just that — vice. Prostitution, gambling, illegal after-hours clubs, that sort of thing. The police increased the size of the squad last year to address human trafficking. In that regard, officers are trained in how to deal sensitively with victims and how to spot pimps and prostitution in social media.

 Aren’t all raids unannounced? How were these brothels able to close shop before a raid?

They’re unannounced — to the public, but not within the Police Department or a particular squad. If a group of cops is talking about their raid coming up tomorrow, and another overhears or sees something on the computer and tips off the subject of the raid, it’s that simple. That’s the thrust of the charges here.

How was it that the Police Department’s Internal Affairs Bureau, the group tasked with investigating officers, missed what was happening?

It’s easy to say in hindsight, “How could they miss this?” And it may come out that they shouldn’t have, that they could have caught it sooner with a proactive integrity test or sting operation. It should also be noted that the crimes described by the prosecutors amount to personal-gain corruption, kind of small-bore in the scheme of things.

What do we still not know?

If this retired detective committed the crimes as charged, when exactly did he begin? He is heard on a wiretap last year saying he’d been doing it for nine years, so that would be 2008, two years before he retired. Were there any other officers involved? And the man accused of running the operation supposedly met his current wife in a brothel during a raid, and he let her sneak out a back door. What’s the story there?

Here’s what else is happening:

Well, hello, autumn. You’re looking lovely.

A mix of sun and clouds will greet you on your morning commute today. The high is an oh-so-nice 68.

We couldn’t ask for a better way to start the week.

• Aaron Carr, the founder of the Housing Rights Initiative, is using his start-up tenant watchdog agency to prevent harassment by owners seeking to force renters out. [New York Times]

• Sean Patrick Maloney, who just lost a Democratic primary for New York attorney general, has resumed his campaign for re-election to the House of Representatives. [New York Times]

• The company S’well will give high school students reusable water bottles as part of an initiative aimed at decreasing plastic bottle waste. [New York Times]

• Does the ousting of a number of incumbents by some of the Democratic Party’s leftmost candidates during the primary election mean that Albany is headed in a more progressive direction? [New York Times]

• Authorities are investigating allegations that four professors at John Jay College of Criminal Justice committed a wide range of crimes, including sexual misconduct. [New York Times]

• Members of the Police Department’s Strategic Response Group shared anonymous accounts of the ways in which they feel pressure to meet quotas. [New York Post]

• A stretch of Washington Heights and Inwood has been officially designated “Little Dominican Republican,” though residents had given it that title long ago. [AM New York]

• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Morning Briefing.

• Learn to express yourself through body language and dance at a movement workshop at Flushing Town Hall in Queens. 6 p.m. [Free, R.S.V.P. required]

• The Public Theater’s mobile unit performs “Sweat,” about a group of friends who work at a factory, at Marcus Garvey Park in Harlem. 6:30 p.m. [Free]

• Meghan Oretsky, Vimeo’s staff picks editor, presents “Ladies with Lenses,” an evening of films made by women at Videology in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. 6:45 p.m. [$10]

• Six comedians perform at “The Roast of Your 15-Year-Old Self” at Union Hall in Park Slope, Brooklyn. 8 p.m. [$10]

• Yankees at Rays, 7:10 p.m. (YES).

• Alternate-side parking is suspended until Wednesday for Sukkot.

• For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide.

Exchange in an Uber 

Dear Diary:

I was planning a party for my friend Rose. I went to a Dollar Tree store in the neighborhood to get poster board, soda and candy. I left with five or six heavy bags. Checking the time, I decided to take an Uber. I had to hurry.

The car that pulled up to the store was a black S.U.V. I got in, taking note that the beige leather seats were lightly worn from use.

“Ruthie?” the driver said, looking at his phone as I closed the door.

“That’s me.”

He nodded. He was probably in his 60s, and he wore an old-fashioned tweed suit and a bowler with a feather. He didn’t look like any other Uber driver I had ever seen.

He started to drive, and I arranged my bags on the car seats.

“My wife’s name was Ruth,” he said in a low, distant tone.

I felt as though no answer I could give would be satisfactory. He seemed sad. I said what I had available, which was “Oh.”

We arrived at my destination and I thanked him.

“Goodbye, Ruth,” he said.

Later that night, after the party, I cleaned candy wrappers off the floor and wondered what else I could have said.

— Ruthie Klein

A year after Hurricane Maria ravaged Puerto Rico, New York continues to remember the victims.

The official death toll from Hurricanes Irma and Maria and their effects is close to 3,000, according to the Puerto Rican government.

Last week, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo proposed a memorial honoring the victims and survivors of the hurricanes and the resilience of Puerto Rico.

“Hurricane Maria was a virtual abandonment of the people of Puerto Rico,” Mr. Cuomo said in a statement last week. “In this country we learn from the good and we also learn from the bad. And this was a stain in American history. And I want to impanel a commission that designs a memorial to the 3,000 lives lost.”

President Trump has questioned this number and called the response to the storm in Puerto Rico an “an incredible, unsung success.”

[Our reporters recently visited more than 150 homes on the island to document the damage. Here’s where things stand a year later.]

The location of the monument is still undecided, but Mr. Cuomo has proposed Battery Park City in Lower Manhattan.

New York Today is a morning roundup that is published weekdays at 6 a.m. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.

What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday. 

Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra S. Levine and Jonathan Wolfe, on Twitter.

You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.

