Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/21/books/review/kate-dicamillo-meg-medina-jacqueline-woodson.html

Title: New Novels From Three of Today’s Most Beloved Children’s Authors - The New York Times

By Melissa Walker

Middle-grade readers live in a wonderful-awful, in-between time that holds both the last moments when toys seem magical and the first breathless discoveries of what deodorant and mascara wands are meant to do. By now, they know about the world’s harshness, but they may not be quite ready to face it full on. These three powerful authors push the edge of comfort in their latest works — presenting the loveliness that the best childhood moments hold alongside the realities of inequity, profound loss and deep neglect. Readers (and their parents) will be all the better for it.

“We think they took my Papi.” The first line of Jacqueline Woodson’s HARBOR ME (Nancy Paulsen/Penguin, 176 pp., $17.99; ages 10 and up) jolts the reader into the news cycle through the eyes of a child. As this captivating novel moves forward we will hear, see and feel more through this lens. It’s a powerful vantage point, and one that holds both the practical realities and the lyrical poignancy of 11-year-old voices in equal tension.

Woodson’s most recent middle-grade work, the National Book Award-winning “Brown Girl Dreaming,” was a memoir. These pages belong to sixth graders in Brooklyn who, when given a space to talk, discover how sharing stories can heal. Haley Shondell McGrath introduces herself by speaking into a hand-held recorder that her uncle gives her: “I am 11 years old. My father is in prison. My mother is dead. But don’t feel sorry for me.”

Haley is part of the class of six students who’ve been assigned to Ms. Laverne because they learn differently. One day in late September, Ms. Laverne leads the kids to a former art room and tells them it’s theirs: “Your time. Your world. Your Room.” The kids dub it the ARTT room, A Room to Talk. Conversation is halting at first, but — as happens in confined, grown-up-free zones of childhood like camp and clubhouses — the room soon becomes a refuge.

Classic middle school exchanges about parents insisting on audiobooks instead of video games (“So not fair!”) brush against bigger moments, and Woodson captures both the inexperience and the innate wisdom of age 11. Ashton, who is white, clashes with his good friend Amari, who is black. Both struggle to understand their place in the neighborhood (why some boys follow Ashton, the rare white kid in school, and slap his neck till it’s red) and in the world (why Amari can’t play with his Nerf gun in the park anymore, but Ashton can). Holly has a story too, and she says to Amari, “I don’t like when you call me rich girl.”

And then there’s Esteban, who often sits in the window. Like his missing Papi (whom we hear from in beautiful letters from a detention center), he has a poetic voice. “Before, you used to hear the word immigration, and it sounded like everything you ever believed in. It sounded like feliz cumpleaños and merry Christmas and welcome home. But now you hear it and you get scared because it sounds like a word that makes you want to disappear.”

There is no escape from the outside world in this book, from the political tempest swirling around us. But sometimes a closer look, a deeper understanding, a different point of view, is better than an escape — especially for kids trying to make sense of the time they were born into. Ms. Laverne tells the students to ask themselves: “If the worst thing in the world happened, would I help protect someone else?” Their promise to one another resonates even after you finish the book: “I will harbor you.”

In Meg Medina’s MERCI SUÁREZ CHANGES GEARS (Candlewick, 368 pp., $16.99; ages 9 to 12), Merci’s harbor is an extended family living in Las Casitas, which is what she calls their three pink, flattop houses that sit side by side. Medina quickly establishes their warm, congenial home life as the center of Merci’s universe.

But sixth grade throws the best of us off balance, and when Merci — who attends a private school on scholarship — is assigned to be the buddy of a cute new boy in town, jealousy swirls in her friend group. Meanwhile, there are troubles at home as the family’s adored grandfather, Lolo, starts to forget things and act erratically.

The 11-year-old’s worldview shifts uncomfortably — her friends have fancy bikes and swimming pools and can “do dumb stuff” at school, but she always has to prove herself. As her Papi tells her after she gets caught breaking a rule, “The value you add to the school has to come from you, because it’s not coming from our wallets.”

It’s clear that Merci loves her family. But she also chafes at family responsibilities, especially the expectation that she’ll watch her little cousins more now that Lolo is less reliable. “Find someone else … I’m not your servant!” she shouts at her aunt after a stressful day. Caught between the world of family and peers, the comfort of Las Casitas and the enticing new call of independence, Merci Suárez is a delightful heroine who, despite real challenges, never wavers in her strong sense of self or her fierce love for la familia. Readers will appreciate watching her navigate how to hold on to what matters when it feels like everything is changing.

There is no home, harbor or even a reliable adult in sight at the opening of Kate DiCamillo’s LOUISIANA’S WAY HOME (Candlewick, 227 pp., $16.99; ages 10 and up). This companion novel to the award-winning “Raymie Nightingale” stands on its own, but follows the adventures of a character we met in the previous book, the unforgettable Louisiana Elefante, known to be the daughter of famous trapeze artists. In “Louisiana’s Way Home,” her cantankerous Granny ferrets Louisiana away from their Florida home in the middle of the night only to wind up on the side of the road with a major toothache. They detour to the dentist, and then end up in a Georgia motel, with now-toothless Granny alternately sleeping and groaning in pain.

Louisiana, with her quick, insightful takes on everyone she meets, grabbed readers’ hearts in “Raymie Nightingale,” and in this book she isn’t about to let go. Though her life has been filled with hardship and uncertainty — and there are more painful secrets to come — she continues to operate with a sense of wonder and practical optimism (the pages shine with it).

As Granny lies immobile, Louisiana meets a boy named Burke who tells her he can get her anything she likes from the motel’s vending machine. Louisiana, always hungry, finds this idea irresistible, and though the ill-tempered motel owner advises her not to listen to Burke, Louisiana knows it’s already too late: “I believed him entirely. I believed everything about him.”

Adult readers will worry for Louisiana. She has faced so much adversity, yet she remains gentle and open. She is also strong as steel, though, and we come to know that Louisiana sees people — really sees them — and she tends to trust the right ones. A couple of times, she reminds herself, and us: “There is goodness in many hearts. In most hearts.” When Burke leads her to his home, a pink house that smells of baking cakes, she finds a loving set of parents inside. Of course, they’re not hers. Nothing is, really, but Louisiana is no fool. “I will have to find some way to rescue myself,” she tells us, a truth we must all face along the way.

