Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/opinion/flower-bloom-night-pilgrimage.html

Title: Opinion | Journey to a Night Flower - The New York Times

By Margaret Renkl

NASHVILLE — For decades, my grandmother was the caretaker of a gangly, disorganized houseplant with nothing, so far as I could see, to recommend it. The plant was ugly, an awkward tangle of greenery fashioned from what seemed to be spare botanical parts: long stems that reached out in a vaguely threatening way and generated new stems, randomly, from within their own stretching expanses. Some of the stems were round and some of them were flat and some were almost serrated, and there were no leaves at all. It was less a plant than something out of a nightmare. As a little girl, I thought it might bite me.

In warm months, the plant stayed on the front porch of that equally gangly, equally disorganized old farmhouse, a dogtrot structure that had been added onto willy-nilly over the years. When the evenings began to cool in early autumn, my grandmother would bring the plant indoors, set it on a table next to the fireplace, and wait hopefully for it to bloom. She called it her “night-blooming series.”

It was years before I understood that the scary plant in my grandparents’ house was actually a night-blooming cereus, a catchall term for several varieties of cactus that bloom at night — often for only one night each year. That’s if it blooms at all: My grandmother’s “series” apparently bloomed only once in all the decades she had it. There are just two pictures of it in full flower, and they were taken on the same night sometime during the 1960s.

I have no idea how my grandmother, a teacher in a two-room schoolhouse tucked among peanut fields in lower Alabama, came to be in possession of such an exotic plant, but I understand her attachment to it. All my life I have longed to see such a plant in flower, but so far my own night-blooming cereus has proved to be a nonblooming cereus. All it grows are ridiculous appendages: One stem is 92 inches long and still growing. This particular variety of cereus is a pass-along plant, easily shared via rooted cuttings. My cutting came from my brother and sister-in-law’s plant, a proven bloomer, but it has never formed a single bud under my care.

Last week, my brother texted a photo of the bud he’d discovered on his plant. “It might bloom tonight!” he wrote. “I looked in my garden journal, and it was fully open by 8 p.m. in 2014.” My brother’s garden journal is a force of nature in its own right, a combination of art and detailed field notes, and I had full faith in his best guess. So I got in the car and drove straight to his house in Clarksville, more than 50 miles from here, stopping only for gas. With a night-blooming cereus, the transformation from bud to blossom can take less than an hour.

Driving west into the sunset I was half-blinded, but I could see well enough through the dust-smeared windshield to note how dry the trees along the highway are right now. The Carolinas may be underwater, but parts of Middle Tennessee are experiencing drought conditions. The trees along the roadsides are covered with dust, and the fall wildflowers have yet to appear: According to the National Integrated Drought Information System, more than 26 percent of the United States is in a drought right now.

Believe me, I recognize the irony: There I was, driving through a parched landscape with a full tank of gas, on a pilgrimage to do nothing more than watch a flower bloom, while the hot winds from the 18-wheelers shook my whole car as they passed.

I am only one generation removed from the farm, and I spent much of my childhood in the very world where my mother grew up, the same one where my grandmother grew up, and my great-grandmother before her, going back farther than anyone could remember. For weeks of every year, I slept in the bed my mother slept in as a child; I walked barefoot down the same red-dirt roads she walked down barefoot as a child; I ate the dark plums that grew beside her childhood porch, at least until they fermented in the hot Alabama sun and made the red wasps drunk on their wine.

Today only 2 percent of Americans live on farms or ranches, but we have not lost our need to be among green things. Which may explain why friends and neighbors were already hurrying to my brother and sister-in-law’s house by the time I got to Clarksville, and why we all gathered together in their living room to wait for the miraculous event to unfold. The plant’s single bud, which spanned the full length of my hand, was clearly in no hurry to open, pink filaments still tightly ribbing it from stem to tip an hour after we arrived. “It’s like counting contractions, waiting for a baby to be born,” someone said.

Then, finally, the bud began to open, at first just one tiny aperture at the very end. The pink filaments began to loosen and lift. As the aperture widened, a star-shaped structure unfolded within it — a white star inside a white flower — and the translucent petals unlayered and arrayed themselves around the star. The flower was nine inches across fully opened, and its perfume filled the whole room with sweetness. It was not a nightmare plant at all. It was the flower of dreams. It would be gone by morning, not to return for another year. If then.

It was just one flower on just one ordinary day in September. Its arrival did nothing to mitigate the drought unfolding in the night outside, and nothing at all to make the floodwaters recede in North Carolina. You could insist that it didn’t matter in any way at all, and I would not think to argue with you.

But it was also not nothing. That night-blooming cereus brought my grandmother back to me in her halo of white hair. It brought back, too, her plum tree, long since cut down, and the feeling of red dirt between my toes. In a time of great cultural dislocation and environmental despair, for an hour it made me remember what it feels like when the world is exactly as it must be, and I am exactly where I belong.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter. 

