Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/21/arts/dance/review-danspace-project-in-times-square.html

Title: Review: Hear the Beat of Dancing Feet, Right in Times Square - The New York Times

By Siobhan Burke

Of all New York City’s classic attractions, a stroll through Times Square may be the one that least appeals to people who live in New York, especially at rush hour. But on Thursday evening, there was reason to brave the crowds, the noise and the invitations to take a photo with Spiderman. Danspace Project, an East Village organization housed at St. Mark’s Church in-the-Bowery, had come to Midtown.

In Danspace Project at Times Square, presented with Times Square Arts through Sunday, three new works — by Laurie Berg, luciana achugar and Full Circle Souljahs — allow even the most jaded New Yorkers to see the city’s commercial epicenter through fresh lenses, sometimes literally.

Before watching Ms. Berg’s enchanting “scape,” in Duffy Square at 47th Street, viewers were encouraged to grab a pair of 3D glasses. As seven dancers appeared, walking calmly through the throngs with linked hands, you could see — but only through these frames — messages printed on their vibrant patterned costumes (the work of Liliana Dirks-Goodman, Jaime Shearn Coan and the designers at Print All Over Me). Some read as subtle calls to action (“Is it a show? Show up.”), others as checks on our scattered attention (“Look again.”).

Attention is hard to hold in Times Square, and Ms. Berg, embracing overstimulation, engineers situations in which you can’t see everything at once. Splintering into small groups, the dancers nimbly carved out corridors and circles where they grooved to DJ Lady Lane’s propulsive soundscape or played with a simple palette of lunges, pivots and swinging arms.

When they all met — turning slowly in a single-file line or sitting cross-legged atop the plaza’s red steps — their synchronous moves recalled the satisfying unison of a Broadway chorus line. By the end, they had so transformed the space, or your perception of it, that you might have mistaken the flashing ads behind them for poetry.

An hour later, on a more traditional outdoor stage, the ensemble Full Circle Souljahs — led by the Bronx duo Gabriel Dionisio and Ana Garcia (also known as Kwikstep and Rokafella) — presented its signature showcase of hip-hop styles in “Behind the Groove — Times Square Edition,” performed with a spirit of love for the city and its underground dance history.

“We met dancing out on the street here in 1991,” Ms. Garcia said of herself and Mr. Dionisio, before paying tribute to a few hip-hop legends in the audience. And there were legends in the making onstage, including the electrifying dancer known as Gravity, who won the evening’s break dancing battle. (Other styles, including popping and house, will be highlighted throughout the weekend.)

A few blocks south, the choreographer luciana achugar offered “New Mass Dance,” a group ritual that sprawled across the pavement of Broadway Plaza. As the dancers — in denim outfits that could have come from the Levi’s store across the street — crawled, slithered, moaned, wailed and paraded uptown belting out a Venezuelan folk song, people gawked. But it was no more surreal than anything else in Times Square: a man standing still holding a small handwritten sign — “Jesus the best way” — or Batman nodding in approval as we walked past him, singing.

