Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/23/sports/football/san-francisco-49ers-jimmy-garoppolo-acl.html

Title: San Francisco’s Jimmy Garoppolo Out for Season With Torn A.C.L. - The New York Times

By Benjamin Hoffman

The San Francisco 49ers confirmed on Monday that Jimmy Garoppolo, the team’s emerging star at quarterback, has torn his left anterior cruciate ligament, ending his season. While questions immediately began to swirl as to whether this could open the door for a return to the N.F.L. by Colin Kaepernick, the unsigned player was not on the team’s list of players that will work out for them on Tuesday.

The 26-year-old Garoppolo was injured at the tail end of a 13-yard run as he tried to rally his team in the fourth quarter. His left foot stepped out of bounds on the play, with his knee buckling awkwardly, before he endured hard contact to his upper body on a hit by Steve Nelson.

After the game, Coach Kyle Shanahan acknowledged to reporters that the team feared the worst.

“With Jimmy we’re fearing A.C.L.,” Shanahan said. “We’ll find out tomorrow. I haven’t had a chance to talk to him yet. I feel for him.”

While video of the play seemed to show the injury happening before Nelson’s hit, Justin Houston, a linebacker for the Chiefs, thought Garoppolo could have avoided the issue by just running out of bounds rather than trying to extend the play.

“I think that was his fault,” said Houston, who was nearby at the time of the hit. “I pray he’s not hurt, it’s nothing serious, but as a quarterback you should step out of bounds. It’s only an inch. An inch wouldn’t have made a difference. You got the yardage. You need to be smart.”

Garoppolo came to the Niners in a trade with the New England Patriots last season and proceeded to go 5-0 as a starter for a team that had been 1-10. Even though Garoppolo had just seven starts over four seasons, San Francisco locked him up with a huge contract that includes more than $70 million in guaranteed money.

It has been an uneven start to this season, with the 49ers going 1-2 thus far, but Garoppolo had his team rolling after an early deficit on Sunday, and had completed 20 of 30 passes for 251 yards and two touchdowns in the game before the injury. In his place, C. J. Beathard had his only pass attempt wiped out by a penalty.

Beathard, a third-round pick in 2017, went 1-4 as a starter in his rookie season, and Shanahan announced on Monday that he would be the team’s new starting quarterback in what could quickly turn from a year in which San Francisco was expected to compete for a playoff spot to one where the team is a contender for the No. 1 pick in the draft.

In addition to the injury to Garoppolo, the 49ers lost their expected starter at running back, Jerick McKinnon, to a preseason injury and had Richard Sherman, a veteran cornerback, leave the stadium on Sunday in a walking boot with an injured calf, which is expected to keep him out for a few weeks.

Beathard said he spoke with Garoppolo briefly after the game and said keeping the team’s morale up will be a key to not surrendering the season. He believes his experience last year can help.

“It’s huge having already played last year,” Beathard said of his readiness. “I feel like it will really help me going forward.”

With no third-string quarterback on the roster, San Francisco will elevate Nick Mullens from the team’s practice squad to serve as a backup to Beathard. They also plan to work out several veterans, with Shanahan mentioning Kellen Clemens, T.J. Yates and Matt Moore as possibilities.

One name that was not on Shanahan’s list is Kaepernick, a former 49ers starter, who has been out of football for the last two seasons after having spent the 2016 season with San Francisco, when he protested police brutality by kneeling during the national anthem.

Kaepernick has not taken a snap in a game since Jan. 1, 2017, and is in the middle of a lawsuit against the N.F.L. in which he contends that the league’s 32 teams have colluded to not sign him.

