Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/19/travel/affordable-seaside-getaways-california-bali-italy-mexico.html

Title: Seven Affordable Seaside Getaways for This Fall - The New York Times

By Shivani Vora

A vacation to a beautiful seaside destination doesn’t have to blow your budget. Travelers who plan their visit for the right time — shoulder or off-season, perhaps, or on a weekday — can find plenty of deals in oceanside locales known for their high prices. 

When it comes to Europe, for example, Simone Amorico, an owner of Access Italy, said that the prices drop by at least 25 percent in upscale spots like the Amalfi Coast after the middle of September. Besides the lower prices, there are other benefits to a post peak-season trip. 

“You have a higher chance of getting room upgrades and reservations at popular restaurants,” he said. “Stores also offer discounts because they want to get rid of their merchandise from the season.” Overall, Mr. Amorico said that travelers can look forward to a trip with fewer crowds and plenty of opportunities to interact with locals in a relaxed way.

Here are seven options for your own luxury beach escape.

In Santa Monica, Hotel Casa del Mar, an exclusive beach club in the 1920s with panoramas of the Pacific Ocean, has an offer where guests who book three nights get a fourth night free. A daily $75 breakfast credit is included and can be used toward room service or at the property’s Coast restaurant. Bookings start from $489 a night after the discount. The promotion is valid through the end of the year.

Bermuda is less than a two-and-a-half hour flight from New York or Boston, and CheapCaribbean has an air-inclusive package to the British island territory from both cities. In addition to airfare, the package includes a three-night stay at the Fairmont Southampton, a nearly 100-acre beach resort full of coconut palm trees. Bookings are valid from Nov. 1 to Dec. 30, and start at $629 per person. The package is also available with flights from Washington, Chicago and Philadelphia with prices starting at $679 per person.

Located in the small beachside village of Trancoso, in Brazil’s Bahia state, UXUA Casa Hotel & Spa, a collection of 11 fishermen’s casas, offers three-, five- or seven-night Ultimate UXUA Experience packages, which include a welcome drink; a scenic boat trip to remote Espelho beach, considered to be one of the country’s most beautiful beaches); lunch at the property’s Asian-fusion restaurant, Silvinha’s; a private cooking class on Bahian cuisine; and a daily massage. Prices start at $475 a night for two people, and you can book at any time. 

For those up for a far-flung seaside holiday, the Belmond Jimbaran Puri, in Bali, has a Suite Life promotion, which includes a stay in a villa with a private terrace and pool, butler service, breakfast, dinner for two at the property’s Tunjung restaurant, a couple’s massage and a one-way airport transfer. Bookings are valid indefinitely, and start from $550 a night for two people. 

In Los Cabos, the Westin Los Cabos Resort Villas & Spa, which overlooks the Sea of Cortez and has three pools and a private beach, is offering the Los Cabos Getaway package. It includes accommodations in a two-bedroom villa, a private sunset sailing trip and a private tequila tasting. The promotion is valid through the end of the year, and bookings start at $169 a night.

Two properties on the Amalfi Coast are offering wellness-focused packages in October and early November.

Monastero Santa Rosa, a former 17th-century monastery perched on a cliff and overlooking the Gulf of Salerno, has the Health & Hike package. Included are three nights accommodations; a guided hike through the Amalfi hills; a picnic lunch prepared by the resort’s Michelin-starred chef, Christoph Bob; a cooking class on healthy Italian food; and an arnica body wrap treatment in the spa. The promotion is valid from Oct. 15 to Nov. 4, and bookings start at $2,835, all inclusive, per person. 

Hotel Santa Caterina, in the town of Amalfi, situated among groves of lemons and oranges, offers the Sense of Well Being package, which includes accommodations, breakfast, a welcoming package that includes sparkling wine, a fruit basket and flowers, a low-calorie lunch and a massage for two. The promotion is valid from Oct. 7 to Nov. 3, and tickets start from 593 euros (about $675) per night. 

