Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/us/glacier-david-marchant-sexual-harassment.html

Title: Sexual Harassment Allegations Wipe a Name Off the Map - The New York Times

By Jennifer Medina

Accusations of sexual harassment have ended the careers of men in many fields, forcing them out of prominent posts and ending relationships with shame. Now the impact has rippled all the way to Antarctic glaciers.

As a 22-year-old graduate student at Boston University, Jane Willenbring traveled to Antarctica to complete research with Prof. David Marchant, a geologist so widely renowned that a seven-mile-long glacier there had been named for him. She would be isolated with a small group in extreme conditions, but she looked forward to weeks of intensive research.

But instead of mentoring her, Dr. Willenbring said, Professor Marchant immediately began harassing her. She said he shoved her down steep icy slopes, blew ash in her eyes and repeatedly made comments about her sexuality.

She did not report the harassment at the time of the expedition, in 1999 and 2000. But in 2016, soon after she received tenure at the University of California, San Diego, Dr. Willenbring filed a formal complaint with Boston University. After a yearlong investigation into the accusations, first reported in the magazine Science, university officials concluded that Professor Marchant had engaged in sexual harassment and said the findings warranted removing him from the faculty.

Professor Marchant is appealing the findings, and is on paid leave while his appeal is pending, a spokesman for the university said.

It turns out his job was not all the professor stood to lose. Earlier this year, the United States Board on Geographic Names received a proposal (it has not said from whom) to change the name of the Marchant Glacier. Since he had been found by the university to have created a hostile and harmful environment for female researchers, the proposal argued, Professor Marchant could no longer be regarded as someone who had made “outstanding contributions to scientific knowledge,” one of the board’s naming criteria.

The board agreed, voting unanimously on Sept. 10 to rename the landmark the Matataua Glacier, after a nearby mountain peak.

“I had no idea this would happen, or even could happen,” Dr. Willenbring said in an interview. “He was always talking about having a glacier named for him, so when I heard, I experienced a little bit of schadenfreude.”

“I’m not sure it’s justice,” she added. “But it’s something.”

Professor Marchant did not return calls seeking comment.

“Geographic names get changed more often than people think,” said Lou Yost, the executive secretary of the naming board. “Not so much for these kind of reasons. But it’s an honor we want to take seriously.”

Dr. Willenbring said that she had hesitated for years to file a formal complaint against Professor Marchant, out of fear that he would ruin her career for speaking out. She changed her mind one day in the spring of 2016 when she took her daughter, who was then 3, to her laboratory.

“She saw me in my lab coat and goggles and gloves, and said she wanted to be a scientist,” Dr. Willenbring said. “I just instantly imagined her being treated like trash 20 years later.”

Dr. Willenbring said she then wrote a draft of the complaint and asked several colleagues to write letters in support. Two other former graduate students wrote about similar experiences on expeditions with Professor Marchant. Dr. Willenbring submitted the complaint and the letters in the fall of 2016, after arriving in San Diego.

“I was really starting to chicken out, thinking, ‘Do I really need this in my life?’” she said. But that fall, the headlines were full of the comedian Bill Cosby’s approaching trial for sexual assault and the tape of President Trump, then a candidate, boasting about harassing women.

“I thought, I am so sick of these men doing this stuff, but I am not doing anything myself,” she said. “I can do something about one person.”

