Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/sports/basketball/spencer-dinwiddie-nets-media-day.html

Title: Spencer Dinwiddie’s Jersey Says Brooklyn. For Now. - The New York Times

By Benjamin Hoffman

The N.B.A. is a business.

It is a concept tossed out by players around the league whenever the subjects of trade rumors or contract extensions come up. And for the Nets, a team that seems to be in perpetual transition, it is something of a mantra.

The pervasiveness of the phrase — which, roughly translated, means players have to distance themselves emotionally from off-court decisions — has rarely been as strong as it was on Monday, when the team held its annual media day in Brooklyn.

Players young and old trotted out the phrase in various forms, typically with a shrug and a tone slightly lower than their other comments. Jimmy Butler named the Nets as one of his preferred trade destinations? That’s business. The team’s roster was once again turned over by a third? Business. Veterans were brought in to compete for playing time with unproven young players, with nearly all of them on expiring contracts? Business.

No player represents the concept better than Spencer Dinwiddie, the 25-year-old guard who exploded last season with career highs in most relevant statistics.

Years of health issues and bad roster fits behind him, Dinwiddie was a finalist for the N.B.A.’s Most Improved Player Award. He is the kind of young star you would expect to be settling into security, but after a summer as the subject of several trade rumors — only to have the Nets trade Jeremy Lin instead — he is not ready to assume he has found a permanent home.

“Is my place on the team secure?” he said, arching his eyebrows and breaking into a large smile. “I don’t know.”

Dinwiddie started 58 games last season, getting his chance mostly as a result of injuries to D’Angelo Russell and Lin, and he took advantage to average 12.6 points and 6.6 assists a game. But with his contract up after this season, he knows he could be gone at any second if the team thinks it can improve.

“It’s the elephant in the room and everybody knows that,” Dinwiddie said when asked about the rumors. “It’s more than just us that’s on the line, it’s all of our families as well.”

But after coming into the league as a second-round pick and getting no real opportunity with the Detroit Pistons, Dinwiddie is taking it as a compliment that so many teams were interested in acquiring him.

“I’ve been on the other side of the situation where nobody cared what I was doing,” he said.

Russell, who will presumably share the backcourt with Dinwiddie, talked about how roster turnover can weigh heavily, whether or not it involves you personally. He said players who write it all off as “a business” were finding a way to cope with a game they love turning into a job.

“It’s hard,” Russell said. “The basketball window is so small that you just have to make the best out of it. It’s clichéd but it’s the truth.”

Even an eight-year veteran like Kenneth Faried, who came to the Nets in an off-season trade with the Denver Nuggets, is far from immune. Faried, a New Jersey native, was excited to be traded “back home,” but his contract — like nine of his teammates’ — expires after this season. A lack of steady ground is nothing new, though, as he was frequently a subject of trade rumors in Denver.

“Since I was drafted I’ve been hearing I was going to get traded,” he said. “But you’ve got to focus on the here and now.”

Lost in all the talk about how no one knows where they will be next season — or even deeper into this season — is that after three seasons of fewer than 30 wins, Sean Marks, the team’s general manager, seems to have molded the Nets into something competitive.

With better health and a few coin-flip games going their way last season, the Nets easily could have won 10 more games; in the Eastern Conference, that would make them a borderline playoff team.

To go with the team’s core of young players — Russell, Dinwiddie, Jarrett Allen, Caris LeVert, Joe Harris and the lone holdout from before Marks arrived, Rondae Hollis-Jefferson — they added a trio of hard-nosed veterans in Ed Davis, Jared Dudley and Faried.

The players seem convinced that the roster, as currently constructed, could be competitive. But for Dinwiddie that would mean sticking around.

As he took in media day, chatting with writers, staff and other players as if they were all his friends, you could tell he was happy to be here. When Hollis-Jefferson mocked a pose Dinwiddie was doing for a photographer, Dinwiddie responded by pulling his teammate into the photo and making him do a pose that was far more ridiculous.

“I love being here, I want to be here, I just keep going,” he said. “Tomorrow I plan on being here.”

If he is not, it will be because the N.B.A., for better or worse, is a business.

