Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/nyregion/nyc-subway-delays.html

Title: The M.T.A. Says the Subway Is Getting Better. Here’s Why You Haven’t Noticed. - The New York Times

By Emma G. Fitzsimmons

Some days, the subway seems worse than ever.

Chunks of debris  rained down on the platform at the Barclays Center stop in Brooklyn last week. Just days before, storms flooded stations and christened a new subway mascot: Flood Rat, a rodent spotted cowering behind a pillar as water surged around it.

But subway officials say the system is slowly getting better — if you look closely.

On Monday, Andy Byford, the leader charged with saving New York City’s subway, argued that the system is improving in a presentation to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority board.

“The statistics show that we are turning the corner where we need to turn it,” Mr. Byford said. “There is no panacea. You don’t just click your fingers and undo decades of underinvestment.”

But New Yorkers are frustrated that the subway is still unreliable more than a year after the agency began a roughly $800 million rescue plan to fix the system.

Here’s what we know.

The M.T.A. provides a trove of data to measure subway performance. Subway officials say some statistics are pointing in the right direction.

Major incidents — the painful meltdowns that delay 50 or more trains — have dropped about 11.7 percent compared with the period right before the rescue plan was introduced in the summer of 2017.

But the statistics have been erratic. There were 105 major incidents in January and 56 in February. Last month, there were 62 major incidents, compared with 63 in August 2017.

Subway trains are breaking down less frequently, though they are far less reliable than they were a few years ago. The distance that subway cars travel between breakdowns was about 122,000 miles last month, up from about 117,000 miles a year earlier. But in 2015 the figure was higher, at about 140,000 miles between breakdowns.

“We’re not declaring victory today by any means,” Sally Librera, the head of the subways department, told the board. “But we are here to talk about progress.”

Subway service is often terrible. More than 60,000 trains were delayed last month.

The on-time rate for subway trains has not significantly improved. Only about 68 percent of trains were on time this past summer, up slightly from 65 percent the summer before — the lowest rate since the subway crisis of the 1970s.

Carl Weisbrod, an M.T.A. board member and a former chairman of the city’s planning commission, said he thought the rescue plan had produced only a “marginal improvement.”

Subway officials say workers have cleaned 285 miles of track, repaired 1,300 signal defects and upgraded 1,600 subway cars. The agency has hired more than 1,000 additional workers.

Riders may be delayed in part because of all the work taking place on the tracks to improve the system, Mr. Byford said.

“The customer’s perspective is probably, ‘Well actually things haven’t really improved too much yet because there are delays,’ literally because we’re doing the work,” Mr. Byford said.

The subway rescue plan was meant to stabilize the system, Ms. Librera said. She acknowledged that riders had lost confidence in the system.

“We know that we haven’t won it back yet,” Ms. Librera said. “We have more to do. We remain 100 percent committed.”

Mr. Byford has proposed a sweeping plan to thoroughly overhaul the subway that could cost $37 billion over a decade. The plan, known as Fast Forward, focuses on upgrading the system’s antiquated signals, which are a frequent reason for delays.

Most transit experts and elected officials support Mr. Byford’s plan. Now he needs to find a way to pay for it.

“Our subway system is in cardiac arrest and you’re doing everything you can to stabilize it, but the reality is we need a heart transplant,” Scott Rechler, an M.T.A. board member and real estate developer, said at the board meeting.

The subway has been a major issue in the governor’s race and local elections. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat who controls the authority, said he wants to pay for Mr. Byford’s plan by persuading state lawmakers to approve congestion pricing, a proposal to impose tolls on drivers entering Manhattan’s busiest neighborhoods.

Mr. Byford said he was focused on gathering support for his plan.

“It’s absolutely the challenge now to build to a crescendo when we run into the budget season, both for the city and for the state,” he said, “to make sure that we build a compelling and irresistible case to fund ‘Fast Forward.’”

