Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/21/t-magazine/design/marble-painting.html

Title: The Ancient Art of Marble Painting Gets a 21st-Century Update - The New York Times

By Leslie Camhi

The origins of marbling — the ancient technique of creating bewitching, swirling patterns of pigment on water and capturing them on paper — remains shrouded in mystery. Japanese aristocrats practiced a related, largely monochromatic technique, called suminagashi (“floating ink”), to enhance calligraphy and haiku, as far back as the 12th century. But it wasn’t until about 1600 that European travelers returned from Turkey and Persia with examples of the marbling we know today: wildly colorful papers that sparked a craze for embellishment among bookbinders, cabinetmakers, stationers and others that lasted well into the 19th century.

Today, the craft is being embraced — and revolutionized — by a group of young artisans. “Marbling, to me, is the visual equivalent of a very good book,” says Rosi de Ruig, a London lampshade designer who wraps many of her shades in handmade marbled papers. “It’s stood the test of time because it appeals to an intelligent eye.” The 45-year-old has earned a following for her vibrant pieces, which are sold at Casa Lopez Paris and Newport Lamp & Shade Company in Rhode Island. She sources much of her paper from the British craftswoman Jemma Lewis, who creates her combinations of rich greens and maroons or pale violets, peony pinks and sky blues in her studio — a cottage in the English countryside. Like the work of many of marbling’s new guard, Lewis’s designs take a variety of shapes, including the deep teal and gold-veined wallpaper in the lounge of the recently opened London member’s club the Ned and the mint-colored curls atop macaroons baked by the London-based cake maker Emma Dodi.

But if the craft has moved beyond endpapers, the method itself remains unchanged. Trays of water are spiked with powdered, carrageenan-rich seaweed extract, which lends a viscosity that allows paint pigments (historically gouache, but now also acrylic) to float on top of the water’s surface. These streams of color are then manipulated by an artist into patterns — there are dozens of traditional ones, some dating back to the mid-15th century, including the fanned “peacock,” the splattered amoeba-shaped “Turkish spot,” the spiraling “French curl” and the Carrara-like “Italian pattern” — using everything from wooden combs and squirrel-hair brushes to swan- and goose-wing quills. Paper or fabric is then lightly placed atop the water’s surface to absorb the design.

Though the process is exacting, the goal isn’t perfection but personality. Indeed, signs of the artist’s hand are at the heart of marbling’s appeal, says the London-based interior designer Beata Heuman, who has launched her own line of all-marbled velvet and viscose fabrics and wallpapers. The decorator used a swirling paper she calls “marbleized” for Notting Hill’s Farm Girl cafe and its just-opened Chelsea outpost and textiles from her line for her West London townhouse, where the sink skirt, among other things, is made from her rich velvet peacock pattern. “The print uses over 1,000 colors,” but, she says, “because there is a sense of movement in it, it doesn’t insist on itself too much. That’s why marbled patterns can work in even a very streamlined, contemporary setting.”

Indeed, the versatility of marbling’s new look — equal parts ancient and modern, Old World and New — could be attributed to the mix of cultures, colors and philosophies at play in work by contemporary makers. “One of the most exciting things happening today is the crossover between suminagashi and European marbling styles,” says the American artisan Natalie Stopka. “In the Japanese tradition, the patterns are much less controlled — they’re really an exploration of fluid dynamics.” Stopka infuses that delicacy and lightness with ornate color combinations in her line of stationary, cotton cocktail napkins and ribbons, which she marbles in delicate shades of putty, shell pink and mauve. This year, she’s also begun creating fine-art prints using handmade dyes extracted from the herbs and flowers she grows in her quarter-acre garden in Yonkers, N.Y.

Practicing a more pronounced interpretation of the suminagashi aesthetic is the 31-year-old Parisian artist Julia G., who launched her Paris marbling atelier, Tomàs Avinent (named after her great-grandfather, a Barcelona typographer) last year. Her art prints take marbling to a refreshingly minimal, modernist extreme: hand-drawn, vividly colored geometric shapes, for example (à la Hockney), floating on marbled backgrounds. “In Turkey, they call marbling ebru — meaning ‘cloud.’ No relation at all to stone,” she notes. In her own work, the artist embraces the natural fluidity and improvisation of the process. “So many things can affect the final result — the temperature of the water or the room, the density of the paint,” she explains. “Our society is confronting the limits of industrialization and mass production. So whether it’s in food, textiles or art, people want that return to a human dimension.”

