Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/21/dining/truly-delicious-truly-simple.html

Title: Truly Delicious, Truly Simple - The New York Times

By Emily Weinstein

Sign up here to receive the Five Weeknight Dishes newsletter in your inbox every Friday. The recipes are also available on NYT Cooking in the Weekly Plan in your Recipe Box. You can save your favorites there.

Hello and welcome to Five Weeknight Dishes. Some recipes announce themselves as weeknight-friendly in warm, breezy tones, only to reveal their true nature when you’re already in deep. That’s the moment you realize the spices are supposed to be toasted and hand-ground. The tomatoes are cut into 64ths. The process requires a pot, three pans, a rolling pin and a blender. You deflate, just a little.

We are not about those recipes. With the dishes below, what you see is what you get; all are easy to make, with electric flavors and no hidden fussiness.

You may have noticed we’re sending this newsletter a little later than usual today. What do you think? Any other thoughts, feedback, kitchen dilemmas? Email me at dearemily@nytimes.com. I love hearing from you.

Here are five dishes for the week:

1. One-Pan Bruschetta Spaghetti

Recipes that cook the pasta directly in the sauce always leave me feeling like I’ve gotten away with something good. (Just me?) This dish is appealingly mussed, casual and just a touch vinegary. Serve with something green that has a little crunch, like string beans.

View this recipe in your weekly plan.

2. Cumin-Roasted Salmon With Cilantro Sauce

This easy recipe flies on its flavors: cumin, paprika, cilantro and chives, though cilantro loathers can use parsley instead. Boil small potatoes to go with the fish and drizzle it all liberally with the sauce. (You may want to double that sauce to use later on chicken, eggs or roasted carrots.) Salad with a super-simple lemon vinaigrette works alongside; so does steamed broccoli, for littler diners.

View this recipe in your weekly plan.

3. Garlicky Steak With Carrot, Walnut and Dill Salad

Beautiful, right? Those carrots are simple to pull off, but use the freshest, best-looking ones you can find, nothing that seems like it’s been languishing at the supermarket since time began. I’m not a good morning-of (or even night-before) meal prepper, but it’d be ideal to get ahead and marinate this steak for several hours. If you’re like me, set the steak aside to marinate while you heat the grill or oven, put a pot of water on to boil for barley or farro, and pour a glass of wine.

View this recipe in your weekly plan.

4. Creamy White Beans With Herb Oil

When you start with canned beans, dinner is nearly done. This recipe anoints them with delicious basil-cilantro oil (which is similar enough to the sauce with the salmon above that you probably could get away with using any of that here, too). Crusty bread and salad are all you need to serve with it, though sautéed or baked broccoli rabe would be nice. For more heft, add an olive-oil fried egg to each bean bowl.

View this recipe in your weekly plan.

5. Harissa Chicken Thighs With Shallots

We couldn’t stop eating this chicken, which is cloaked in a sauce spiced with cinnamon and harissa, the North African pepper paste and a strong shortcut for weeknight flavor. The shallots melt into the sauce, which is precisely as good as it sounds. Serve with rice or Israeli couscous, and a baby spinach salad dressed with lime.

View this recipe in your weekly plan.

That’s it! This newsletter is a production of NYT Cooking, where you can see and save these recipes in  your weekly plan. For unrestrained, wind-in-your-hair access to thousands of recipes like these, consider becoming an NYT Cooking subscriber. You can follow me on Instagram, and NYT Cooking on Instagram, Facebook and Pinterest. Email my amazing colleagues at cookingcare@nytimes.com if you have technical or cooking problems, or send me a note anytime just to say hi: dearemily@nytimes.com.

