Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/20/t-magazine/madeline-weinrib-turkish-ceramics.html

Title: Turkish Ceramics, Collected by a Textile Designer - The New York Times

By John Wogan and Illustrations by Aurore de La Morinerie

Eight years ago, on a wander through Istanbul’s Grand Bazaar, Madeline Weinrib, the artist and textile designer (and granddaughter of the founders of ABC Carpet & Home) spotted an intricately painted blue-and-white vase. Thus began her obsession with late 20th-century pottery from Kutahya, a Turkish city known for a particularly colorful form of patterned earthenware that has been produced there since the 15th century. “They’re beautiful but not precious, and I actually use them — the vases for flowers, the bowls for olives and nuts,” says Weinrib, whose collection numbers about 30 pieces. “I like things that feel special but also serve a purpose.” An affinity for bold design and utility is also what defined Weinrib’s namesake line of home décor, a business she recently closed to focus on special collaborations, made-to-order fabrics, rugs and vintage finds she’ll sell at her eponymous Manhattan studio. In addition, she’s working with local artisans to create pillows, caftans and textiles that will be sold at Vanessa Branson’s Marrakesh hotel, El Fenn, later this year, and in the spring, she’ll release a collection of carpets she created with the late poet and artist Rene Ricard.

Dinner plate. “This style reminds me of my textiles. Each one is hand-painted and different from the other, but when you put them all together, it just works.” 

Vase. 

Platter. “I love the detail of the Islamic calligraphy in the center.” 

Vase. “The first Turkish ceramic I bought at the bazaar in Istanbul. It’s one of a pair.”

Earthenware bowl. 

Dinner plate. “The colors in my collection really inspire my work. This dish has a turquoise glaze that’s just beautiful.” 

Bowl. “This star-shaped bowl was a gift from a woman I worked with in Istanbul for many years. She knows my taste.”

