Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/19/travel/venice-hotels.html

Title: Two Venice Hotels, Two Sides of a Celebrated City - The New York Times

By Suzanne MacNeille

From the Marco Polo Airport, there are a few ways to get to the Palazzo Venart hotel, which lies a short distance across the indolent waters of the Venetian Lagoon.

A private water taxi, for instance, will deliver you, stylishly and speedily, to the Venart’s pier; from there it’s a short stroll across the hotel’s sculpture garden to the scented inner confines of a 15th-century palazzo. At $200 or more (with tip), a water taxi may be expensive, but it befits the destination: a small, elegant inn where you could spend seven or eight times your fare on a suite overlooking the Grand Canal.

And then there’s the Alilaguna water bus, the 15-euro (about $17.50) choice. On a late Sunday morning last spring, everything about this option was long: the line at the airport pier, the 45-minute wait for the boat, and the trip itself — nearly an hour aboard a cramped, slow-moving vessel piled with luggage and people.

I was embarking on the first half of an assignment that would take me to two relatively recent arrivals on the Venice hotel scene: one luxurious, the other affordable. At the 18-room Venart, I would spend about $700 on what was then one of the least expensive rooms. It was an extravagance that left no room for budgetary error; a $200 taxi fare, no matter how thematically appropriate, would not allow me to, say, eat.

At the far less glamorous A & O Venezia Mestre hostel-hotel, a supersize budget lodging in the Mestre area on the mainland, I would spend the equivalent of about $115 on one of the most expensive accommodations: a bright, bare-bones twin room.

The Venart is not the priciest hotel in Venice, and the A & O is not the cheapest. My goal was to try accommodations on both ends of the price spectrum — though not at the far ends. Here is what I found.

Velvet drapes; baroque-style furnishings; gold and marble everywhere: Somehow the Venart manages to combine the lush trappings of centuries past with an airiness (high ceilings, abundant light) and modernity (contemporary sculpture) that keeps the stuffiness factor to a minimum. Operated by the Italian branch of LDC Hotels & Resorts, the palace has seen the comings and goings of many an illustrious individual, among them, according to the hotel’s literature, “the famous warlord Pandolfo Malatesta … who found shelter here after his excommunication and sentence to be burned to death for his uncontrolled greed of glory and money.” Something to feed your imagination as you explore the nooks and crannies of the mansion, which has undergone an extensive restoration aimed at preserving the building’s colorful past. 

The overhaul was a two-year process overseen by Italy’s Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Activities, which sent a representative each week to ensure that the restoration of marble floors, glass ceilings, Renaissance frescoes, staircases and portals was carried out in a precise, historically correct manner. The result is the kind of immersive authenticity that may lead you to ignore the celebrated city that lies beyond the palazzo gates.

Some may find this quiet corner of the Santa Croce neighborhood too far from the action — although a visit to the Rialto Bridge, with its suffocating crowds, might change your mind. This is an area where unencumbered views of canals, alleyways and colorful, crumbling edifices abound, as do bakeries, cafes and neighborhood bars. Practically around the corner from the hotel is the richly embellished San Stae church, and, conveniently, the San Stae vaporetto stop.

Key cards are so practical. At the Venart, they are nowhere to be found. The key to my room was a heavy, brass, tasseled affair — not exactly something one can slip into a pocket. The door it opened revealed a lovely room: tall windows, velvet walls, a sitting area and king-size bed, which would yield a 10-hour night’s sleep after a turbulent overnight flight. In a corner stood a spindly baroque desk. A handwritten note greeted me, along with a wooden box of fruit. The air-conditioning was cold; I turned it off, opened the windows, and birdsong filled the room. 

The marble and tiled bathroom, in shades of beige and cream, is spacious, with a roomy tub and heated towel rack. Between the double sinks was an array of fragrant Etro toiletries. Towels, need it be said, were fluffy, as was the robe. 

The hotel has plenty of gardens and trees (cypress, palms and magnolias, among them), so admire your leafy surroundings by settling down with a book and a glass of wine in the courtyard, or the patio and garden area, which overlooks a collection of sculptures that span the centuries, and offers a serene view of the Grand Canal. Between the courtyard and the patio, the lobby, filled with flowers and Murano glass objets d'art, is a place to linger. A marble staircase leads to a lounge with gilded bookcases, ruby walls and a painted Napoleon III Giltwood piano, which sits, prim and ornate, in a corner. In any of these spots, a member of the hotel’s personable staff may materialize in case refreshments are desired.

The existence of one of Venice’s best restaurants, Il Glam Ristorante & Bar, on the Venart’s property means you don’t have to search for a place to eat a memorable meal. A small, smart dining room overlooking the courtyard is the setting for a lunch or dinner that could go on for hours. The chef, Enrico Bartolini, a prolific Michelin-star earner, serves a classic tasting menu (90 euros): a stream of delicate, often flower-strewn dishes that might include a vivid pink-and-white beetroot risotto with Gorgonzola; frisella with walnut flour, puntarelle salad and anchovies; braised veal cheek and a tiny dollop of strawberry ice cream with rhubarb in salt water. Do make reservations for breakfast, another delicious, drawn-out meal, served, in warm weather, in the courtyard.

If you’re in search of elaborate spa treatments and lively bars, this isn’t the place for you. But if you want to luxuriate in exquisite surroundings and can stomach a hefty bill, the Venart may be worth the splurge. 

Palazzo Venart, Calle Tron 1961, palazzovenart.com. 

The A & O Venezia Mestre is a warehouse of a hostel-hotel, with nearly 1,000 beds on multiple floors, a cavernous, industrial-chic lobby and, on a late morning in mid-May, a bevy of backpackers gathered at the mile-long reception desk or sleeping it off on the multicolored couches.

The company, which had its start in Berlin in 2000 and now has a presence in 21 European cities, represents a generation of budget lodging that broke the mold of what was once considered the typical backpackers’ hostel: dingy dorm rooms, zero design sensibility, a place to escape as soon as you secured your bed. These days, a convivial lobby, clean spacious rooms and a decent breakfast are becoming the norm, and that is what you will find here.

The Venice branch is one of the A & O’s newest additions, and it has clearly been discovered by the budget-travel bunch. Judging by the people in the lobby on a May evening, that bunch is a large group: lots of 20-somethings, as one might expect, but almost as many 30-somethings, with a generous sprinkling of young families, retirees with backpacks and ambitious schedules and, in a less frenetic section of the lobby, a few people who looked like business travelers tethered to their computers and cellphones. Languages and accents I heard included French, Danish, British, Italian, Slovenian, West African and German. Oddly, not a single American accent.

Still, the staff is both helpful and harried, intent on moving people in and out quickly and efficiently. Still, A & O offers an environment that encourages socializing and communication, and that is not by accident.

This part of Mestre isn’t pretty, but easy bus and train connections to the old town make it convenient. After arriving in the chaotic transport hub for which Mestre is known, my husband and I negotiated the snarl of streets and traffic until a group of backpackers picking their way around haphazardly parked vehicles alerted us to the hotel’s presence. An open patio area in front was lined with comfortable seating, occupied by young travelers who seemed oblivious to what lay all around them: a construction zone, some of it devoted to low-cost accommodations, including another A & O that will soon add hundreds of beds to the company’s presence in the area. 

The A & O website spells out the room choices, which range from a bunk in an eight-bed “dorm” room (22.16 euros for a Saturday night in early October, according to a recent price check) to a twin room that recently cost 85.50 euros (we paid close to 100 euros in May). There are also four- and six-bed rooms, as well as family and female-only rooms. We paid an extra 10 euros for early arrival, knowing we would be there a few hours before the usual 3 p.m. check in. How happy we were to bypass those restless souls in the lobby and find our room at the end of a long, silent, institutional-feeling hallway. The room was a pleasant surprise: Ikea minimalism, high ceilings, flat-screen TV. In the blazingly bright white bathroom, we found decent towels, a hair dryer and dispensers for shampoo and soap. The room was quiet, the bed perfectly comfortable. 

With colorful couches, chairs and ottomans, and chandelier-like light fixtures, the lobby is a hive of activity: travelers coming and going, napping, poring over maps, checking laptops. The room has been divided into zones; there are tables where you can check email, a bar area, a sort of living room area, a children’s corner with an array of toys. After 9 p.m., the room takes on the vibe of a stylish, loft-like night spot, with piped-in music, people sipping wine and beer and coffee, playing pool, reading, flirting.

“Five or 10 years ago, there were no more boring places than hotel lobbies. We like to avoid that,” said Oliver Winter, the chief executive of A & O. Encouraging guests “to meet other people, to interact, to communicate” is as much of his aim as keeping rates affordable.

You’re unlikely to find a superb meal in these parts. A bar-cafe in the hotel serves coffee, drinks (alcoholic and otherwise) and various snacks. There are some cheap restaurants near the bus area and a pizza joint down the street. Save your appetite for Venice proper. Do opt for the breakfast when you make your online reservation: An all-you-can-eat buffet in a cafeteria-style room does the job of filling you up.

Unlike Palazzo Venart, which you’ll never want to leave, the A & O compels you to get out, and that is a good thing — after all, you did come here to see Venice.

A & O Venezia Mestre, Via Ca’ Marcello 19, aohostels.com/en/venice/venezia-mestre. Children under 18 sleep free.

