Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/23/sports/baseball/yankees-gregorius-wrist-orioles.html

Title: Yankees Lose to Orioles. More Important, They Lose Gregorius. - The New York Times

By Wallace Matthews

If Sunday’s home finale against the Baltimore Orioles was the last look that Yankee fans will have at their team in 2018, this is what they will remember: An offense that scored three quick runs in the first inning and then went quiet for the rest of the day. A bullpen implosion that turned a 3-1 lead after five innings into a 6-3 loss to an inept Orioles team that has already lost 110 games this season.

But what the crowd did not see was perhaps the most damaging loss of all: In the postgame news conference, Yankees Manager Aaron Boone revealed that shortstop Didi Gregorius, one of the most important players on the team, had sustained torn cartilage in his right wrist in Saturday’s 3-2, 11-inning victory. Gregorius might not return for the final seven games of the regular season or even for the wild-card game that the Yankees will play on Oct. 3.

Asked if he expected to have Gregorius back by the end of the week, Boone said: “Unsure. I mean, there’s a real possibility we do. There’s also a possibility that we don’t. We’ll know a lot more in a few days when we see how the wrist responds.”

Gregorius was injured on the final play of Saturday’s game when he slid home headfirst on Aaron Hicks’s game-winning double, a play that clinched a wild-card berth. As Gregorius swept his left hand across the plate, his right hand caught on the ground behind him, causing what he said was “a small tear” in the cartilage on the underside of his wrist.

It is not far from the spot where his teammate Aaron Judge sustained a chip fracture that sidelined him for seven weeks.

Gregorius said he was not aware of the injury after the game and felt no significant pain until Sunday morning, when he awoke with a swollen wrist. A magnetic resonance imaging test revealed the tear, and he was given a cortisone shot to relieve the pain. Boone said the injury would be re-evaluated in several days.

Gregorius said: “It feels a little bit better now. When I woke up this morning, it wasn’t feeling good. It’s really frustrating.’’

Asked if he thought he might be ready in time for the wild-card game, Gregorius said: “I hope so. I’m not one to sit back and watch.”

Boone said that in Gregorius’s absence, the Yankees would cobble together an infield by sliding second baseman Gleyber Torres over to shortstop and inserting Neil Walker at second, or starting Adeiny Hechavarria, a defensive wizard with a weak bat.

“We’ll mix and match a little bit,” Boone said.

The loss of Gregorius, whose 27 home runs and 86 runs batted in are each second most on the team, was the final blow on a day in which little went right for the Yankees after their three-run first inning. In fact, the day started out looking like a disaster for the Orioles when their starting pitcher, Alex Cobb, had to leave after four pitches because of a recurring blister problem on the middle finger of his pitching hand.

Cobb’s replacement, Mike Wright Jr., walked the first three batters he faced and then gave up a sacrifice fly to Torres and run-scoring singles to Miguel Andujar and Gary Sanchez.

But the Yankees’ lineup, without Gregorius, Hicks and Judge, had only two more hits — a double by Andujar in the third and a single by Giancarlo Stanton in the eighth. Their only other base runner was Hicks, who walked as a pinch-hitter in the seventh. But with an opportunity to tie the game — the score was 5-3 at the time — Judge, pinch-hitting for Brett Gardner, struck out.

“We get three runs in that first inning and it looks like we’re going to be able to continue that all day, but we just stalled out offensively,” Boone said. “Frustrating way to end this homestand, but we just got to get past it and get up.”

J. A. Happ, the Yankees’ most reliable starter in the second half of the season and the likely starter for the wild-card game, lacked his usual sharpness but held the Orioles to one run, on Tim Beckham’s long homer in the second inning. But his unusually high pitch count, 107 through five innings, prompted Boone to remove him and go to A. J. Cole from a bullpen depleted from Saturday’s extra-inning game.

Cole faced three batters and allowed in succession a leadoff double, Beckham’s second home run of the game and a solo home run by Renato Nunez. That put the Orioles ahead, and the Yankees never answered.

With the Yankees clinging to a slim lead over the Oakland Athletics for the right to host the wild-card game, Sunday’s loss could have been particularly costly. But in the only good news the Yankees received all day, the A’s lost to the Minnesota Twins, maintaining the Yankees’ one-and-a-half-game lead in the wild-card race.

But that was small consolation on a day in which the Yankees may have lost a vital part of their lineup.

