Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/22/sports/baseball/yankees-orioles-wild-card.html

Title: Yankees Complete Long Day’s Journey to a Wild-Card Spot - The New York Times

By Wallace Matthews

The good news was right in front of the Yankees on Saturday afternoon, high up on the out-of-town scoreboard beyond the center-field fence: The Toronto Blue Jays had just beaten the Tampa Bay Rays. Now all the Yankees had to do to qualify for October was beat the Baltimore Orioles, the worst team in baseball.

The Champagne was in the house, the plastic wrap was ready to protect the lockers. Surely, the Yankees would prevail against the Orioles and thus clinch one of the two American League wild-card berths and the right to play a single-elimination game, in all likelihood against the Oakland Athletics, on Oct. 3.

But the moment was easier imagined than accomplished. It took 11 innings and a lot of listless baseball before the Yankees finally outlasted the Orioles, 3-2, and guaranteed themselves a spot in the postseason, even it lasts only one game.

And it took one of the more unsung Yankees, Aaron Hicks, to finally come up with the winning hit, which he did after fouling a pitch off his ankle and falling to the ground. He proceeded to get up and double home Didi Gregorius.

“I just knew it hurt a lot, and if the game went on, it was going to get worse,” said Hicks, who underwent X-rays after the game; they came back negative. “Once I hit that ball off my ankle, I was going on adrenaline.”

Manager Aaron Boone and the trainer Steve Donohue raced out to check on Hicks, the center fielder, who assured them he could continue, and two pitches after hammering the ball off his left ankle, Hicks hammered a 2-2 pitch from reliever Paul Fry into the left-field corner. Gregorius, who had led off the inning with a single — the Yankees’ second hit since the fourth inning — scored from first just ahead of the throw by left fielder John Andreoli.

Victory being an effective anesthetic, Hicks was able to jump up and down at home plate with his teammates and join in the Champagne celebration in the clubhouse briefly before being taken for X-rays. But his ankle was not the only casualty of the game; Hicks’s jersey was torn off his back and a silver necklace snapped off his neck.

“I’ll turn it into two bracelets,” he said.

Hicks also found a bottle of $300 Champagne — meant for savoring, not spraying — left by an unidentified teammate on the chair in front of his locker.

It was a fitting tribute to a player Boone had called “one of the most underrated players in baseball” before the game. Hicks, a switch-hitter, got his 26th home run of the season batting left-handed off the Orioles’ starter, David Hess, in the second inning, and stroked the winner batting right-handed against Fry.

“When you peel back the curtain, he’s just a great player,” Boone said. “It’s been exciting to see him continue to evolve as one of the best players in this league.”

While the victory assured the Yankees of a wild-card berth, that outcome had seemed a foregone conclusion for some time.

“I think when you realize you’ve finally finished it off and punched your ticket, you really appreciate it,” Boone said. “We all start zero-zero in the postseason, and we feel just as capable as any other team that’s going to be in it.”

Now the task is to finish with a better record than Oakland and host the wild-card game in the Bronx, where the Yankees are 53-27, the second-best home record in baseball. The A’s trailed the Yankees by two games pending the outcome of their Saturday night game against the Minnesota Twins.

“That’s huge,” the Yankees’ Giancarlo Stanton said of obtaining home-field advantage. “It means the difference between having to fly cross-country or making them come into our jungle here.”

Few of the Yankees seemed aware during their nearly four-hour game that the Rays had already lost, putting the playoff berth within their grasp. Hicks said he never looked up at the scoreboard. Luke Voit, who also homered off Hess in the second, said he realized only when he returned to the clubhouse briefly late in the game and saw the clubhouse attendants installing plastic barriers in front of the lockers.

But for some time, it appeared that the celebration still might have to be delayed.

After Hess left the game, the Yankees managed just one hit — Gleyber Torres’s seventh-inning double — over the next four innings. Torres reached third on a passed ball but was thrown out at the plate when Wilkerson snagged Andrew McCutchen’s grounder to third and fired home.

Then the Orioles loaded the bases with one out in the 10th inning against Jonathan Holder. But Holder got lucky when Chris Davis hit a hard liner right at Voit at first, and escaped disaster when Breyvic Valera popped out to the infield. In all, the Yankees’ bullpen turned in six scoreless innings, allowing four hits and striking out nine.

.

Now the Yankees just need to finish ahead of the A’s. And then beat them in the wild-card game, wherever it takes place.

“We go there throughout the season, and nobody complains,” Gregorius said of a possible trip to Oakland. “Why start complaining now?”

Inside Pitch

J. A. Happ, who will start Sunday’s series finale — and the final home game of the season — has not been officially designated the Yankees’ starter for the wild-card game, although his final start of the season next Friday against Boston would put him on regular rest for the Oct. 3 showdown. Asked if he wants to pitch that game, Happ, who joined the Yankees on July 31, said: “I don’t know the best way to answer that. I want to pitch, I know that.’’

Despite Gary Sanchez’s defensive struggles, Aaron Boone said he would be behind the plate for the wild-card game. “Since he’s come back from the disabled list, I think the bulk of his defensive work has been really strong,” Boone said.

