Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/arts/television/insecure-season-3-episode-7-obsessed-like-recap.html

Title: ‘Insecure’ Season 3, Episode 7: The Bad Decision Index - The New York Times

By Aisha Harris

Where art thou Nathan, the Houston native/barber with a suspiciously patchy beard who once convinced Issa to swim naked in a stranger’s pool and fool around while stuck atop a Ferris wheel?

This is the only question on Issa’s mind throughout “Obsessed-Like,” the penultimate episode of Season 3. The thought of Nathan pulling a Casper on her freaks her out, and leads Issa to do some truly wild things to try to get to the bottom of this answer. Were they wild enough to crown her this week’s Worst Decision Maker? Let’s see.

It’s been a week since Issa last heard from Nathan, and to say she is not O.K. would be an understatement. Usually, we get only very brief glimpses into Issa’s direct inner thoughts; an aside here or there. This time, the show’s writers delve into her streams of consciousness as she goes about her day, and they do an excellent job conveying just how all consuming Nathan’s sudden avoidance becomes for her. This is especially difficult to watch — anyone who’s ever been a teenager with a crush, or even an early 20-something falling hard for someone else, probably knows what it’s like to reel from unrequited affections.

But Issa’s in her 30s, and the obsessive anxiety over his ghosting is really sad; attempting to slide into his DMs under the disguise of a “stalker” account she shares with her girlfriends (and failing miserably to do so) is high school behavior. Convincing Molly to bring fake apology desserts to Andrew so Issa can see if Nathan’s home, and then sneaking into Nathan’s room and attempting to hack his computer is legit stalker behavior.

This one-track mind is also interfering with her plans to make the block party happen, and she knows it. Thankfully, by episode’s end, she recognizes what she needs to do, and acknowledges that a hot guy who bought her a taco once upon a time isn’t going to be the one to fix her deep-seated insecurities. But wow, it took a lot for her to get to this place. This was definitely a setback.

Growth: +1 for refocusing and attending the entrepreneur workshop in the last few minutes of the episode.Spinning Wheels: -3 for everything else she did before that.Final score: -2

At this point it seems like there’s no use in hoping Molly will ever break her penchant for self-sabotage. Going into her second date with Andrew, the only question was, how would Molly mess it up? And when she does, it’s for the most ridiculous of reasons: Andrew makes a lighthearted reference to her relationship with Dro (after she jokes about Andrew making out with his friend’s girlfriend), and suddenly, Molly gets defensive and upset. It was clear in Season 2 that hooking up with a married friend would not be good for her, and the far-reaching consequences continue to resonate.

At work, she initiates an opportunity to prove her worth by giving a presentation to the senior partners without Torian, who can’t be at the office in time. This is probably not the best idea, seeing as Molly hasn’t been at the firm that long and has now managed to slight three colleagues who rank above her. Politically, she’s setting herself up to have no solid allies within the company, risking her ability to ever rise above her current rank. It’s a wonder that she’s gotten as far as she has when she still makes so many rookie mistakes.

Growth: 0, zilch, nada.Spinning Wheels: -3; Oh, come on, Molly!Final Score: -3

Whelp, Lawrence is back for more than just a cameo this season, and apparently he’s going to serve as the show’s exploration of spirituality. In re-evaluating his life choices, he decides that he wants to try church — I guess contracting an STD and being forced to reconcile with how much unprotected sex you’ve been having will do that to a person.

The church Lawrence chooses has a pastor whose out of whack metaphors strain to engage youth (“Slide out the DM, and slide into this pew,” he preaches), and a woman congregation member who seems a little too eager to make Lawrence into her God-fearing husband. He’s clearly wary of the experience, but when he and Issa meet for coffee, she suggests he might just need to find the right church for him.

A little while ago, Lawrence probably would have led the church woman on, as he did with Tasha. But instead he’s taking things slow, with the cautiousness of a wiser, more mature adult who’s learning from his past. That’s progress.

Growth: +2Spinning Wheels: 0Final Score: 2

Worst Decision Maker of the Week: Molly squared.

Final thought: Everyone on this show seems to be great at giving others advice — well, everyone except Chad, the perpetual scoundrel — while being wholly unwilling to or incapable of following it for themselves. See, in this episode: Molly comforting Issa after their ill-fated trip to Andrew’s house. You can’t help someone else if you won’t help yourself, as the saying goes; maybe this is why these characters continue to flail so hard?

