Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/18/dining/frankies-457-spuntino-brooklyn.html

Title: ‘The Franks’ Will Rework Their Brooklyn Restaurant Empire - The New York Times

By Tejal Rao

When Frank Castronovo and Frank Falcinelli, friends since childhood, opened their first Brooklyn restaurant together in 2004, cooking simple Italian fare from behind the induction burners of the narrow kitchen, you could still see old-timers in the neighborhood walking home with lard bread from Italian bakeries.

But over the past 14 years, that neighborhood, Carroll Gardens, has changed, and the ambitions of the Franks, as Mr. Falcinelli and Mr. Castronovo are collectively known, have changed as well.

In November, the two men — owners of the Frankies Spuntino Group — plan to close their popular Germanic restaurant Prime Meats, which opened in 2009, and use the space to expand the dining room of Frankies 457 Spuntino, which will accept reservations for the first time, via Resy.

They will also open a new wine bar in the space that is now the Prime Meats barroom, and a Sicilian-style pizza place up the street in their former coffee shop, Cafe Pedlar. They say they will later make some updates to their Frankies location in the West Village, known as Frankies 570 Spuntino.

“When we first opened Frankies, we just wanted people to get in and out for under $20,” Mr. Castronovo said. Now, as the brownstones around their Brooklyn businesses sell for several millions of dollars, the restaurateurs want to redirect their efforts, and try to establish Frankies as a timeless New York institution, like Peter Luger Steak House.

“When we think about Luger’s, we think about tradition, longevity and consistency,” Mr. Falcinelli said.

“What we want to do now is set ourselves up for something that’s going to live longer than us,” Mr. Castronovo added. “Something that will always be here.” 

From the street, Prime Meats and Frankies appear to be separated by several storefronts, but a large back kitchen connects them. Mr. Castronovo and Mr. Falcinelli plan to walk diners through that interconnecting kitchen to the new Frankies dining room, which should be open by November. They said they wanted it to evoke a famous kitchen scene from the film “Goodfellas.”

Mr. Castronovo and Mr. Falcinelli expect new kitchen equipment to arrive in early October, when they’ll close Prime Meats for just a few days to install pasta cookers, a grill and a flattop. Then they will get back in the kitchen, to develop new dishes for both the restaurant and wine bar.

Until it closes in November, the menu at Prime Meats will offer its greatest hits from over the years, such as the schnitzel and sausages. After that, a few of those dishes will live on, in the new Frankies menu. “You’ve got to have a steak, a real steak, at least one,” Mr. Castronovo said.

When it first opened, the restaurant bought its sausages from Faicco’s Italian Specialties, but the kitchen has been making its own since 2011, most recently a cacio-e-pepe sausage as well as a more traditional mazzafagati, made with pork liver.

The Frankies menu will expand along with the dining room. It will include more vegetarian dishes, some grilled fish and more varieties of Italian-style sausages.

Mr. Castronovo and Mr. Falcinelli will also take over the small building next door to Frankies and expand the restaurant’s backyard so they can cater larger events, both indoors and outdoors, for up to 100 people.

The bar inside Prime Meats will become Franks Wine Bar. The restaurant group’s wine director, John Paterson, plans to pour about 20 wines by the glass each night, most of them French and Italian.

The bar’s sign — big, red, neon — is a gift from the restaurateurs’ friend Jimmy Kimmel, and Mr. Castronovo and Mr. Falcinelli are working with the Springs Collective, the firm that designed Frenchette. They say that once the updates are complete, diners will hear a wider variety of music.

“You’ll hear more than just the Grateful Dead,” Mr. Falcinelli said. 

By the end of the year, Cafe Pedlar, which closed in April 2017, will reopen as Franks Umberto, a slice joint in partnership with the Long Island pizzaiolo Umberto Corteo.

“We grew up as kids watching Umberto make pizza,” said Mr. Falcinelli, who first met Mr. Castronovo in Queens, where they went to school together. “He’s legendary.”

“As kids, he was the pizza god to us,” Mr. Castronovo said, “and I still think he makes one of the best pizzas in New York.”

At 75, Mr. Corteo runs several pizzerias on Long Island and serves grandma and Sicilian-style pies., which are baked in shallow pans. “The dough is literally like it’s confited,” he said. “It’s so delicious, it’s like butter.”

Franks Umberto will use different ingredients, including flours and tomatoes, than Mr. Corteo uses at his Long Island restaurants, but Mr. Corteo will be on site, baking the pies in his style.

“We’ve tried so many things but over time, it seems like what’s dear to us, what we really love, is this Italian thing,” Mr. Castronovo said.

Mr. Falcinelli nodded. “Coincidentally, it’s what everybody else loves, too.”

Follow NYT Food on Twitter and NYT Cooking on Instagram, Facebook and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.

