Source: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/24/us/super-typhoon-yutu-pacific-mariana.html

Title: ‘Catastrophic’ Super Typhoon Yutu Slams Into U.S. Commonwealth in the Pacific - The New York Times

By Jacey Fortin

Updated Oct. 25

A super typhoon that slammed the Northern Mariana Islands this week has left communities devastated, with more than 100 homes destroyed and emergency workers struggling to help displaced families.

By Friday morning local time, Super Typhoon Yutu, which meteorologists said could be the strongest storm to have struck the United States this year, had swung away from inhabited territory into the Philippine Sea, Paul Stanko, a senior meteorologist with the Guam Weather Forecast Office, said in an interview early Friday morning.

The Northern Mariana Islands, a United States commonwealth in the Pacific Ocean, northeast of Guam, include Saipan, Tinian and Rota. The commonwealth, which is 14 hours ahead of the East Coast, is home to more than 52,000 people, a vast majority of whom live in Saipan.

The eye of the storm passed directly over Tinian around 2 a.m. local time on Thursday. Wind speeds reaching 180 m.p.h. or higher made the storm the equivalent of a Category 5 hurricane. A typhoon warning was no longer in effect for Tinian and Saipan late on Thursday, according to a statement by emergency authorities. But Mr. Stanko said surf up to 20 feet high continued to pound coastal areas.

The local Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Management urged residents on Thursday to stay indoors to allow workers to clear roadways of debris and downed power lines. Mr. Stanko said cars were stacked on top of each other.

“It takes quite a bit of wind to do that,” he said. “We are figuring at least 150 miles per hour to be tossing around cars like that.”

Edwin K. Propst, a representative in the commonwealth’s Legislature, had spent a sleepless night at home with his family on Saipan as the worst of the storm passed over, he said in an interview on Thursday. “Last night, it was like a freight train and a 747 were racing, and you’re right in between them,” he said.

As the storm ripped the shutters off his home and broke windows, he eventually retreated into a back room. But after sunrise, he ventured out to survey the damage.

“I visited several constituents who lost it all,” he said. “Their homes, their valuables, their prized possessions.”

Typhoon warnings were called off Thursday afternoon, after reports of the overnight damage rolled in, including about 100 homes destroyed in Tinian, Brandon Aydlett, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service, said in an interview from Guam Thursday local time.

He added that in Saipan, there were reports of collapsed roofs, fallen power lines and destroyed trees.

“I would say this is catastrophic damage,” Mr. Aydlett said.

Gov. Ralph Torres said in a statement on Thursday that the storm had wrought “extensive damage” on infrastructure on Saipan and Tinian that has “left the commonwealth devastated with many families displaced.”

“Relief and recovery efforts are now well underway,” he said. The relief will include food, water, cots, toilet kits, tarps and temporary shelter, as well as drive-by food distribution, his statement said.

Hundreds of people have sought refuge from the storm in government-run shelters, but those had reached at full capacity, and the number of people needing shelter is expected to rise, a statement from the Red Cross said on Thursday. Continued bad weather and the storm’s devastation are hampering relief and recovery efforts, it said.

Melanie Castro, 29, said the power went out on Wednesday afternoon in her neighborhood near Micro Beach on the western side of Saipan. She stayed awake all night as the storm swept through.

“We couldn’t sleep because of the noise outside,” she said. “The wind was shouting. We were just hiding and praying.”

On Thursday morning, she went to the restaurant where she works as a waitress. She saw extensive damage and flooding, and she does not know when the business will reopen. But at least the roof was mostly intact, she said — the restaurant next door had its roof torn off.

On Wednesday, President Trump declared an emergency in the Northern Mariana Islands and authorized the Federal Emergency Management Agency to begin disaster relief efforts.

Some FEMA workers had arrived in the commonwealth by Thursday morning, said Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan, the commonwealth’s delegate in the House of Representatives, in a series of posts on Twitter. He added that ports were closed, many flights were canceled, and some health care facilities had been damaged or were running on generator power.

Mr. Stanko said the storm, as of early Friday morning, was heading in the direction of Taiwan. It could reach the area next week with winds of about 100 m.p.h. “Not the incredible beast” that was Yutu, he said. “Typhoons can’t maintain that level of intensity.”

Mr. Propst said he had not seen a storm this bad in decades and would not be surprised if electricity did not return to Saipan for months. “We really need help,” he said. “Our island has been flattened. It’s one of the worst typhoons we’ve seen in a very, very long time.”

